---
title: "Effective Remedy in the Context of Hacking by Intelligence Services"
author: "[Lori Roussey](#Lori-Roussey)"
date: "2017"
...


---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This master thesis was written under the direction of judge Myriam
Quéméner and attorney at law Brad Spitz, who I wish to express my
gratitude for their guidance and support.

Keywords: data protection, cybersecurity, digital rights, strategic litigation,
FIXME

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------




10000 10000







## Introduction

On May 12 2017, numerous patients at the UK National Health Service
(NHS) who needed to undergo medical operations did not get to see a
surgeon. Their operations had been postponed. The cause? Connections
between computers, X-ray scanners used to treat cancers, and other
medical equipment had been interrupted and rendered inoperable.
Communication channels within and between NHS trusts, such as emails and
phone lines, were unavailable. Patient records were no longer
accessible: they had been encrypted\[1\]. Instead, NHS staff saw a
strange pop-up window replacing patient records, demanding a 300$ ransom
per machine, accompanied by a spine-chilling warning:

> <Llapen>Many of your documents, photos, videos, databases and other
> files are no longer accessible because they have been encrypted. Maybe
> you are busy looking for a way to recover your files, but do not waste
> your time. Nobody can recover your files without our decryption
> service. \[…\] You only have 3 days to submit the payment. After that
> the price will be doubled. Also if you don’t pay in 7 days, you won’t
> be able to recover your files forever.”

In few hours, 47 trusts had been hit. In the course of the week-end, 150
countries suffered computer infections\[2\].

At the root of this unprecedented and global mayhem is the United States
of America’s National Security Agency (NSA)\[3\]. For last summer, a
group of hackers — calling themselves the Shadow Brokers — announced it
had stolen “digital weapons” from US intelligence services, including
the NSA. In March 2017, the Shadow Brokers started releasing several
programs specially designed to take advantage of targeted
vulnerabilities. Cybersecurity experts swiftly analysed the release and
found it relatively harmless, as most of these “exploits” were outdated.
The remainder of exploits, including a few Microsoft zero-days, were
patched within days to prevent the vulnerabilities from being exploited.
Among these Microsoft zero-days was the “EternalBlue” exploit.

It is the very same exploit, called WannaCrypt or WannaCry, that was
included in the ransomware that hit NHS Trusts. Even two months after
the patch, massive damages were caused, because computer systems had not
been updated.

In the wake of these appalling events and enormous damages caused by
exploits developed or acquired on the darkweb with tax-payers’ money, a
question is left unanswered. Who can victims turn to? How can victims
get their damages repaired? If one causes someone else damages by their
fault, they oblige themselves to repair it. This is a founding principle
of private law around the globe. Yet, in the context of intelligence
services hacking tools, obtaining legal redress remains highly uncertain
for a private legal or natural person. This creates a cognitive
dissonance once confronted to the UK’s Government Communications
Headquarters (GCHQ)’s admission that in 2013 20% of its reports
contained information derived from hacking\[4\]. Hacking techniques may
be deployed against “computers, servers, routers, laptops, mobile phones
and other devices” such as smart devices connected to the internet.\[5\]

For this reason, this dissertation attempts to cast a legal perspective
on the right to effective remedy in the context of intelligence
services’ recourse or acquisition of hacking tools.

*Evolution of the verb to hack.* Originally the verb “to hack” had no
negative connotation whatsoever with breaking into a system. It meant to
find one’s way out of a given physical or nonphysical challenge. A
hacker would be someone thinking outside of the box. In the digital
field, such a person would then apply this thinking to software as well
as hardware. Mindful of this semantic background, in the context of
surveillance intelligence services often refer to synonyms of hacking,
like Active Signal Intelligence (ActiveSIGINT) or Computer Network
Exploitation (CNE) and Computer Network Attack (CNA)\[6\]. These
expressions illustrate the essence of today’s connotation of hacking:
the act of voluntarily interfering with data or equipment.

*The critical notion of exploit.* Today’s assertion of the term hacking
associates it with the compromising of an equipment or software. This
assertion goes hand in hand with the critical notion of exploit.
According to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN), “\[t\]he term exploit is commonly used to describe a software
program that has been developed to attack an asset by taking advantage
of a vulnerability”. When referring to exploits cyber security experts
often mention zero-days. A zero-day is an exploit that has not yet been
revealed to the public or the person in charge of fixing it. In that
sense, zero-days enabling to take the control of a commonly used program
or equipment, such as the Microsoft XP program exploited by WannaCrypt,
are rare and have a tremendous harm potential. The interest of
intelligence services in zero-days has allowed a grey market to flourish
on the darkweb, as services’ financial resources make it a highly
lucrative activity. In her book *Countdown to zero-day*, former Wired
journalist Kim Zetter cites the NSA budget for “covert purchases of
software vulnerabilities” from private vendors: $25.1 million in
2013\[7\].

*The notion of Intelligence services.* Turning to the notion of
intelligence services, this dissertation will only reflect on the
recourse to hacking tools by intelligence gathering agencies, not law
enforcement ones. Intelligence services may resort to hacking tools in a
wide variety of cases, sometimes remotely related to “national security”
per se, ranging from rendering a favour to another country\[8\], to
sabotaging an other country’s nuclear facilities\[9\], to spying on
organisations such as the European Commission or the European
Parliament\[10\].

*Scope of this dissertation.* This dissertation is not aimed at leading
a general reflection on public international law. It attempts to provide
elements and insights on public and private law principles regarding
redress applied to the recourse to hacking tools by intelligence
services, as well as the implications entailed by transfers of such
tools to private persons or between services.

*A strain on the rule of law.* Hacking and the transfer of hacking tools
are used in practice by intelligence services around the world. The use
of such tools fortuitously happens to increasingly strain the rule of
law, directly or because they nurture international criminality. This
analysis leads to study national, regional and international law due to
fragmentation as well as shared competences. This is illustrated by the
EU’s subsidiarity principle restricting Union competences\[11\] and its
creation of new standards for all Members States to abide to on matters
of surveillance.\[12\] Still, civil and criminal law principles will be
the leading themes of this dissertation, as it aims at indicating what
could be paths for reflection and action on legal redress in the form of
compensation, an international civil law principle, as well as
reflecting on the need to obtain the prosecution of abuses harmful to
the cohesion\[13\] of society, an international criminal law principle.

Various legal tools establish effective remedy requirements in their own
words. Hence, the provision of a general perspective on this notion in
the context of intelligence services’ hacking seems necessary and will
be twofold.

*Existing and potential safeguards.* Prior to obtaining damages or any
form of compensation for his losses one first needs to be given legal
minimum safeguards against hacking by intelligence services. For this
reason, this paper will begin by the assessment of existing safeguards
as well as potential redress avenues.

*Providing satisfactory compensations.* This assessment shall then be
completed by a reflection on what could lead to a satisfactory
reparation.

Why an analysis from an effective remedy perspective? The answer to this
legitimate question can be condensed in the following statement by
former Member of Parliament and former Defense Minister Hervé Morin,
during the preparation of the French 2015 Intelligence Bill:

> “What I don’t want is that in France, one day, in 2017 or in 2022, an
> arbitrary regime uses these monitoring tools without any control.
> Power is always associated with a servile court phenomenon, and I will
> always doubt the capacity of a central administration director to
> resist the pressure of a head of state.”\[14\]

The provision of effective remedy, going hand in hand with fair
reparation, enables the enshrinement of what constitutes the essence of
the rule of law.

<div style=height:100px;></div>

## Remedy Avenues in Intelligence Services Hacking Related Cases

The provision of redress mechanisms is a fundamental principle in
private law, to secure access to justice and effective remedy.

*A general principle of Union law* The right to access to effective
remedy is based on Article 13\[15\] of the 1950 European Convention on
Human Rights (ECHR hereafter). In the European Union, this right was
reinforced by the *Johnston v. Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster
Constabulary* (222/84) CJEC, May 15, 1986 judgment of 15 May 1986 by the
Court of Justice, making the right to an effective remedy a general
principle of Union law.

For legal and natural persons to benefit from an effective remedy in
case of damage or any form of encroachment on their rights, remedy
avenues must be provided to meet this effective remedy criterion.

*Balancing sovereignty and human right principles* Still, when it comes
to surveillance programmes it seems that legal milestone principles are
difficult to implement, as they might weaken State sovereignty. As a
consequence, lawyers must ponder to help find a balance so that State
sovereignty is not secured at the expense of basic human rights
principles, such as the right of access to justice or the right to
private life.

To that end, this first chapter shall focus on existing remedy avenues
available to direct or indirect victims of hacking by intelligence
services.

*International standards and national frameworks.* To grasp a better
sense of the state of available redress avenues offered to victims of
hacking related to intelligence services’ activity let us get the gist
of international conventional provisions and case-law on the matter.
Secondly, one shall cast a closer look to national representative or
particularly interesting legal frameworks surrounding hacking by the
services.

*Potential unbattered remedy avenues* After that, potential unexplored
of future remedy avenues will be considered.

### 1\) International Stipulations and case-law

To address the pressing issue of the resort to CNE by services, it is of
foremost importance to begin with an overview of the international
framework applicable to guide the recourse to such techniques. Then this
overview will be completed with the interpretation opted for by regional
courts.

#### A) International Stipulations on Effective Remedy and Hacking by Intelligence Services

First, this chapter shall introduce the relevant legal framework
applying to the effective remedy criterion in international and regional
laws. This presentation will be followed by the overview of the legal
framework applicable in case of CNE and the exchange of CNE tools.

##### The Effective Remedy Criterium in International and Regional Law

###### From a United Nations (UN) Perspective

The effective remedy principle is enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (UDHR) of 1948\[16\] and in the 2005 Basic Principles
and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of
Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law\[17\]. The latter are of
foremost interest as they go exhaustively in details. The UN General
Assembly opens its 60/147 Resolution adopting the Basic Principles and
Guidelines on remedy and reparation by recommending that:

> <Llapen>States take the Basic Principles and Guidelines into account,
> promote respect thereof and bring them to the attention of members of
> the executive bodies of government, in particular law enforcement
> officials and military and security forces \[…\].”

This recommendation’s wording is circumstantial to introduce this study
of intelligence services’ handling of highly intrusive intelligence
techniques.

Article I(2) of the Guidelines further provides that states shall adopt
“appropriate and effective legislative and administrative procedures
and other appropriate measures that provide fair, effective and prompt
access to justice” and concretely set up “available adequate, effective,
prompt and appropriate remedies, including reparation”\[18\]. In
addition, this article hints at the non-discrimination principle\[19\]
in application of which states shall ensure “that their domestic law
provides at least the same level of protection for victims as that
required by their international obligations”\[20\].

Articles 3 and 11\[21\] reinforce states’ duty to provide for “equal and
effective access to justice” as well as “\[a\]dequate, effective and
prompt reparation for harm suffered”, and to do so “irrespective of who
may ultimately be the bearer of responsibility for the violation”.

The Guidelines go in depth regarding reparation by devoting nine of
their articles to the matter, from Article 15 to 24. The obligation to
repair victims shall be scrutinized in the second part of this paper.

It is noteworthy to stress that the Guidelines expressly put emphasis on
the fact that its remedy and reparation stipulations shall not be
derogated from\[22\].

###### The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)

The ICCPR\[23\] reinforces safeguards, providing that States must
undertake to ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms are
violated has an effective remedy, that such rights and freedoms shall be
“determined by competent judicial, administrative or legislative
authorities, or by any other competent authority provided for by the
legal system of the State, and \[shall\] develop the possibilities of
judicial remedy”. In like manner, state parties must make certain “the
competent authorities shall enforce such remedies when granted”\[24\].
In a nutshell, state Parties have a proactive obligation vis-à-vis
potential victims to set up strong, enforceable and judicially reviewed
remedy avenues.

Besides, Article 3(a) carries a welcome specification in the context of
CNE by intelligence services, by highlighting in fine that effective
remedy shall be assumed, “notwithstanding that the violation has been
committed by persons acting in an official capacity”\[25\].

###### The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)

For its part, pursuant to its Article 13 the ECHR\[26\] ensures the
protection of the right to an effective remedy. Unlike the ICCPR, the
Convention strikes no distinction whether the remedy avenues shall be
ensured before an administrative or a judicial authority (“national
authority”). On the other hand the ECHR emphasizes in the very same
wording as the ICCPR that effective remedy shall be assumed,
“notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons
acting in an official capacity”\[27\].

###### The EU Charter

By the same token, the EU Charter\[28\] affords similar guarantees at
its Article 47 and associates the right to an effective remedy with the
right to a fair trial and effective access to justice\[29\], ensuring
individuals the power to challenge authorities.

###### The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR)

To finish, though rudimentary worded, the ACHPR\[30\] provides in its
turn for a form of effective remedy. Yet, this example remains anecdotal
as its effectiveness criterion seems only relevant in terms of
timeliness of the proceedings\[31\]. This is in no way satisfactory as
it may hinder cases of blatant encroachment on the UN right to an
effective remedy if they were for instance limited to the unreasonable
cost of proceedings.

In conclusion, the right to an effective remedy is soundly enshrined in
international and regional law as a building block allowing for other
fundamental rights to thrive. It is regularly associated with the right
to a fair trial, to access to justice and to reparation. Let us now
ponder on the effective remedy principle from an CNE
perspective.

##### CNE and Remedy Avenues in Case of Hacking Related Damages

###### CNE and Associated Redress Avenues in the Light of the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime

The Budapest Convention on Cybercrime\[32\] is a particularly notable
legal instrument as it is the first and most prominent international
treaty on crimes committed via computer networks. This initiative
emanates from the Council of Europe (CoE) but is open to any state
outside of its Members. The Convention has three main goals:

  - Harmonising domestic criminal substantive law on elements of
    offences and connected provisions in the area of cyber-crime;
  - Providing for domestic criminal procedural law powers necessary for
    the investigation and prosecution of such offences as well as other
    offences committed by means of a computer system or evidence in
    relation to which is in electronic form and ;
  - Setting up a fast and effective regime of international
    co-operation.\[33\]

As of today, it gathers 69 countries, ranging from the USA to Israel,
Russia, Canada and the UK. In its preamble, the Budapest Convention
expressly aims at enhancing harmonisation of criminal policies and
providing cybersecurity around the globe.

*CNE per se* Regarding CNE per se, the Budapest Convention affords
guaranties within Article 32\[34\], where it prevents any Party from
penetrating a computer network situated on an other Party’s territory
without “the lawful and voluntary consent of the person who has the
lawful authority to disclose the data”. The wording of this article
translates the ambition of the Convention. That is, fostering sound
cooperation for a safer digital space.

*The sharing of CNE tools and intelligence* On the sharing of
intelligence services hacking tools, Article 6\[35\] provides that any
misuse of device shall be subject to “criminal offences under \[…\]
domestic law, when committed intentionally and without right”. Yet, the
Convention accompanies this obligation with a possibility to derogate
from this stipulation, safe “the sale, distribution or otherwise making
available of \[…\] data by which the whole or any part of a computer
system is capable of being accessed”, that must always be provided for
in the Party’s statutes.

*A Convention providing for no remedy avenues* Regrettably, the
Convention does not provide for particular remedy avenues, but refers to
the rights protected by “the 1950 Council of Europe Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the 1966 United
Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other
applicable international human rights treaties”. Its enforceability is
hence considerably diminished. So far the Convention has no case-law
interpreting its provisions.

###### UN on CNEs: State of Negotiations

*Slow negotiations* The UN has been gathering countries around the table
to draw up a common instrument regarding CNEs for several years. A
handful of countries, like China and Russia, have shown reservations on
multiple aspects of the negotiations by fear of interference and,
simultaneously, loss of their sovereignty on the matter. Tensions reside
particularly on procedural aspects, hence directly impacting the right
to an effective remedy and the right to reparation the UN attaches to
it. Nevertheless, negotiations may resume, as these last months have
seen some of the most reluctant countries invest themselves in the
furtherance joint pondering to foster the elaboration of a shared
playing-field.\[36\]

*A rudimentary framework* To conclude, even if the Budapest Convention
of 2001 stands for a symbolic sign that most countries can gather and
set out common rules they are willing to abide to, the current framework
on CNEs remains rudimentary in the light of the aggressive policy\[37\]
and the damages caused by unfettered recourse to CNE/CNA and CNE/CNA
tools by intelligence services.

*A framework entailed by fragmentation* Despite the existence of the
Budapest Convention, nowadays the legal framework applicable on matters
related to CNEs is characterized by fragmentation and lack of respect of
the legality principle, partly due to secrecy and disparate national
dispositions. Countries’ unwillingness to give away their sovereignty on
the matter calls for a detailed analysis of the interpretation opted for
by the Courts on matters of effective remedy in surveillance
cases.

#### B) International Case-law on Effective Remedy Applied to Surveillance

*Technical neutrality* In the first place, it is of foremost importance
for the reader to bear in mind that following the ECtHR *R.E. v. U.K.*
ruling, whatever surveillance technique is resorted to “\[…\] the
decisive factor will be the level of interference with an individual’s
right to respect for his or her private life and not the technical
definition of that interference”(*R.E. v. U.K.* (62498/11) ECtHR,
4<sup>th</sup> sect., Oct. 25, 2015, point 130). Hence, analogies will
be drawn throughout this chapter to read the European Courts’ case-law
in the light of hacking by intelligence services.

##### European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) Case-law

*The right to an effective remedy as a mean to guarantee other
fundamental rights* As seen above, the European Convention on Human
Rights’ Article 13 stipulates that “Everyone whose rights and freedoms
as set forth in this Convention are violated shall have an effective
remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation
has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.” In that
sense, the Court considers that “\[a\]rticle 13 of the Convention
guarantees the availability at national level of a remedy to enforce the
substance of the Convention rights and freedoms in whatever form they
are secured in the domestic legal order. The effect of this Article is
thus to require the provision of a domestic remedy allowing the
competent national authority both to deal with an “arguable complaint”
under the Convention and to grant appropriate relief." (*Souza Ribeiro
v. France* (22689/07) ECtHR, g. ch., Dec. 13, 2012, para. 78). Put
simply, the right to an effective remedy is a mean to guarantee the
protection of other fundamental rights found in the Convention from
encroachment, such as the right to privacy.

*Secret surveillance’s mere existence as a interference* Besides, the
ECtHR has relentlessly made clear its appreciation of what legitimate
surveillance consists of. “\[T\]he mere existence of legislation which
allows a system for the secret monitoring of communications entails a
threat of surveillance for all those to whom the legislation may be
applied” (*Liberty v. UK* (58243/00) ECtHR, 4<sup>th</sup> sect., Jul.
1, 2008, para. 56), implying that this sole factual possibility “amounts
in itself to an interference” of the right to privacy. Furthermore the
Court stressed there is no need to provide evidence that a person “has
been subject to a concrete measure of surveillance” (*Klass and others
v. Germany* (5029/71) ECtHR, Plen., Sep. 6, 1978, para. 37-38; see also
*Weber v. Germany* (54934/00) ECtHR, 3<sup>rd</sup> sect., Jun. 20,
2006, para. 78).

*Secret surveillance as an acute threat to redress avenues* This general
position of the Court is further confirmed by its all-encompassing
wording of the acute threat posed by secret surveillance to redress
avenues in this *Klass* case, where it held that “where a State
institutes secret surveillance the existence of which remains unknown to
the persons being controlled, with the effect that the surveillance
remains unchallengeable, Article 8 (art. 8) could to a large extent be
reduced to a nullity. It is possible in such a situation for an
individual to be treated in a manner contrary to Article 8 (art. 8), or
even to be deprived of the right granted by that Article (art. 8),
without his being aware of it and therefore without being able to obtain
a remedy either at the national level or before the Convention
institutions.” (*Klass and others v. Germany* (5029/71) ECtHR, Plen.,
Sep. 6, 1978, para. 36).

*Secret surveillance shall not be judicially unchallengeable* In the
eyes of the ECtHR it is critical “to ensure that the secrecy of such
measures did not result in the measures being effectively
unchallengeable and outside the supervision of the national judicial
authorities and the Court” (*Kennedy v. the United Kingdom* (26839/05)
ECtHR, 4<sup>th</sup> sect., May 18, 2010, para. 124).

*Effectiveness to be assessed in concreto* This positioning of the Court
is consistent throughout time, as it starkly averred in *Pruteanu v.
Romania* that in any system of surveillance, adequate and effective
safeguards must be provided against abuse. The Court went as far as to
specify that the effectivity of the safeguards was to be assessed, inter
alia, on the kind of remedy avenues provided by the national law. In
addition, the Court found that Romania should have provided rulings
proving that the domestic effective avenues put in place were effective
in practice (*Pruteanu v. Romania* (30181/05) ECtHR, 3<sup>rd</sup>
sect., Feb. 3, 2015, para. 48, 55).

To conclude, in its case-law the European human rights jurisdiction
takes a clear stand on secret surveillance. National legal frameworks
must have effective remedy avenues in place for a surveillance programme
to be deemed lawful. Regrettably, the scarcity of its guidance on what
such remedy avenues could be leave room for interpretation and
discretion, even though the assessment in concreto is a robust
safeguard.

##### European Court of Justice (ECJ) Case-law

*The ECJ to take the path of the ECtHR* Even if the European Union’s
origins are rooted in commercial harmonisation, since the Snowden
revelations of 2013, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) has delivered
landmark rulings on surveillance programmes. As a matter of fact, the
Union is increasingly following the ECtHR’s path in drawing clear
fundamental safeguards for EU citizens.

Since the enshrinement of the effective remedy principle as a general EU
law principle with the *Les Verts v Parliament* (*Les Verts* (294/83)
CJEC, Apr. 23, 1986, para 23) and the *Johnston* (*Johnston v. Chief
Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary* (222/84) CJEC, May 15, 1986,
para 18 and 19) cases, it has not been extensively interpreted by
judges.

*Following the in concreto approach?* Nevertheless, before proceeding to
the application of this principle to surveillance measures, a light
shall be shone on the opinion\[38\] of the Advocate General in the
Aarhus case(*Aarhus* (C‑243/15) ECJ, g. ch., Nov. 8, 2016). In her
Opinion, Mme Kokott chose to assert whether the national rules at hand
were making it “impossible or excessively difficult to exercise rights
conferred by EU law (principle of effectiveness)” (para 98), since this
very principle “gives effect to Article 47 of the Charter” (para 99).
This methodical approach of what constitutes effectiveness in domestic
law appears optimal.

*The landmark Schrems ruling* Mme Kokott’s Opinion was rendered in an
environmental law context but it mirrors the choice made by the ECJ in
2015 when judges were faced with an Austrian citizen deprived from any
remedy avenue to question the American surveillance operated on his
personal data sent oversea in accordance with the Safe Harbor decision
of 2000. Indeed, judges opted to interpret Article 47 of the Charter in
that it “requires everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the
law of the European Union are violated to have the right to an effective
remedy before a tribunal in compliance with the conditions laid down in
that article. The very existence of effective judicial scrutiny designed
to ensure compliance with provisions of EU law is inherent in the
existence of the rule of law” (*Schrems* (C-362/14) ECJ, g. ch., Oct. 6,
2015 para 95).

*Effective judicial scrutiny inherent in the existence of the rule of
law* UE case-law, in contrast with the ECtHR, has taken some time to be
confronted with surveillance techniques as it is originally not meant to
have jurisdiction on national security matters. Still, with commerce
becoming increasingly intertwined with surveillance scandals, it was
foreseeable that the ECJ would someday find itself competent when a
particularly interfering case would be referred before it. With its
landmark *Schrems* ruling the Court of Luxembourg has audibly averred
that a prerequisite for a surveillance programme to be legitimate under
the rule of law is the provision of an effective remedy, and in
particular, an effective judicial review.

As seen supra, the acception of the effective remedy notion and the
interpretation attached to it by European Courts in surveillance cases
have been anchored in the last few years. It shall now be confronted to
a national framework as, despite the ratification of the Budapest
Convention, countries’ statutes regarding CNEs and the provision of an
effective remedy thereof remain fragmented, primarily for sovereignty
reasons.

It was found by the expert study lead in response to a request of the
European Parliament’s LIBE Committee\[39\] that in practice the
judiciary’s office is considerably hindered in guaranteeing the rights
of the defence in national security related cases. These observations
stemmed from the close analysis of both national legal frameworks
regarding the services’ activities and techniques as well as the
unravelling of proceedings before Courts and oversight bodies. In order
to illustrate and reflect on the report’s conclusions, French national
provisions on intelligence services’ hacking and the remedy avenues
provided by thereto shall be scurinized extensively.


<div style=height:100px;></div><div style=height:100px;></div><div style=height:100px;></div>

### 2\) Case Study: France, Between Autonomy and Heteronomy

<div style=height:100px;></div>

France’s case is one of particular interest as it is a historically
strong state, economics and intelligence-wise. While it has inextricably
developed a sharp sense of sovereignty, it is also an EU Member State, a
Member of the Council of Europe and a Budapest Convention ratifier. In
that sense it may be said as between autonomy and heteronomy. Heteronomy
is the opposite of autonomy, where an entity lives and interacts with
the outer world according to its very own nature and values. In this
context, being heteronomous means to thrive according to legal norms
enshrined by superior levels of authority. Indeed, France’s legal norms
encompass primary international and European law as well as the
fundamental rights found and enforced by supranational courts and the
guidance emanating from organisations such as the UN. For these reasons
this country will be extensively studied as regards its legal framework,
its remedy avenues and the effectivity of the right to effective remedy
in
practice.

<div style=height:100px;></div><div style=height:100px;></div><div style=height:100px;></div>

#### A) French Legal Framework Pertaining to CNEs and Effective Remedy

##### Hacking by Intelligence Services

*The French Penal Code* The French relevant provisions on CNEs and CNAs
per se can be found at Article L853-2\[40\] of the ISC and in Chapter
III\[41\] of the Penal Code on unauthorised access to automated data
processing systems, at Articles 323-1, 323-2 and 323-3\[42\].

*The Intelligence Act* Article L853-2 allows services to resort to
techniques such a keyloggers recording every key pressed by the victim,
or tools similar to the ones used by the GCHQ like Flame to take
computer screenshots\[43\], Captivatedaudience to hijack computer
microphones\[44\], Gumfish to activate computer webcams and take
pictures\[45\], or Tracker Smurf activating the GPS tracker of a phone,
even if it is switched off\[46\].

The following article, L853-3, provides for circumstances when services
need to penetrate a private space (vehicle or private location) to
place, use of remove devices needed to resort to techniques specified at
Article L853-2.

*The wide material scope of article 323-8* Articles of the Penal Code go
further in-depth. They notably include in the definition of hacking the
exploitation of computer networks by way of, inter alia, accessing,
remaining, modifying, interfering, extracting or transmitting data. This
definition is completed by Article 323-8\[47\], setting extremely vague
grounds to implement surveillance measures whenever they are meant to
“ensure the protection of the fundamental interests of the Nation
\[…\] outside the national territory”. It is apparent from the Code
that these measures may be implemented from within the national
territory as well as from outside of it.

*Implications of article 323-8* Interestingly, Articles 323-1, 323-2 and
323-3 do not mention that the CNEs they define may be resorted to by
intelligence services. It is simply implied by Article 323-8 that
carries a derogation for services when such CNEs are meant to protect
France’s interests outside its borders.

##### Transfers of CNE and CNA Tools

*Legitimate transfers* Regarding transfers of CNE and CNA data and
programs the aforementioned Article 323-3 defines it but again, without
allowing services to resort to it. Their usage of this technique is
merely implied by Article 323-8. Transfers within or across the French
border are further depicted at Article 323-3-1\[48\]. This article is
the only one of the Chapter on Unauthorised access to automated data
processing systems that provides for the eventuality that such transfers
may be done with a legitimate motive. This raises two observations.

Firstly, it is bitterly regrettable that Article 323-3-1 provides for
“legitimate motive” instead of “lawful motive”. This wording is
neither future-proof nor a dispassionate democratic illustration that
the French society is willing to set out a clear legal framework of its
recourse to intelligence techniques. The current formulation of Article
323-3-1 may give leeway for secrete interpretations of this article to
be developed in the future.

Secondly, a bold interpretation of the derogation created by 323-8 could
lead one to use the liberty given by this article introduced in 2015 to
justify that to exchange hacking tools Intelligence services would not
always have to invoke France’s interest. Such transfers might also be
done to render a favour to an ally service, taking the example of the
Stuxnet hacking tool developed by the NSA together with the Israeli
Mossad. In her book, intelligence services expert journalist Kim Zetter
stresses that the US have chosen to develop and transfer this tool with
Israel to render a favour to the later\[49\].

*Plausible breach of the legality principle* Again, Article 323-8
creates a broad derogation whenever transfers within as well as outside
the country are operated by French Intelligence services in the name of
the protection of French interests outside France’s territory. Such
provision affords the risk of being deemed in breach of the criminal law
principle of legality\[50\].

*No French oversight for intelligence “provided by foreign agencies”*
Last but not least, Article L. 833-2\[51\] of the Internal Security Code
(CSI) sets out the missions of the French Intelligence oversight body,
the Commission Nationale de Contrôle des Techniques de Renseignement
(CNCTR)\[52\]. The fourth point of this article expressly provides that
“elements provided by foreign agencies” shall not enter the material
scope of its oversight. As seen supra with the Stuxnet example, hacking
tools are and may very well continue to be passed on among national
services.

Therefore, today French intelligence services have numerous means to
avoid accountability or oversight. A considerable impediment for one
seeking remedy avenues. These shall now be studied.

##### Remedy Avenues

As already mentioned, the French Intelligence Act of 2015 have
predominantly been codified in the eighth Book of the Internal Security
Code (ISC). So were the special remedy avenues for litigation against
intelligence services’ techniques, that can be found at the fourth Title
of the eighth Book of the Code.

###### General Competence of the Council of State

Pursuant to Article L801-1 ISC, the Council of State now has exclusive
jurisdiction over such litigation.

*Oversight by the Council of State* Under this special venue, the
Council of State may check: - Whether the use and implementation of an
intelligence technique complies with Book VIII of the ISC (e.g. in terms
of authorization by the Prime minister, intelligence data retention,
etc.), and - Whether the processing of personal data in the context of a
secret Government database made in the interest of State security
complies with the French Act no. 78-17 of 6 January 1978.

*Redress offered by the Council of State* Regarding redress offered by
the Council of State, it may cancel the authorisation to proceed to the
surveillance and, potentially, order the destruction of unlawfully
collected intelligence. Otherwise, if the Council deems the surveillance
illegitimate it may order the rectification, update or deletion of
data.\[53\]

*Secrecy and the formation spécialisée* The proceedings are made before
a special court of the Council of State (called “formation
spécialisée”). This special court of the Council of State is
constituted of administrative judges subject to State secrecy clearance
pursuant to Article L832-5. The proceedings are governed by specific
rules modifying administrative justice procedure to underpin State
secrecy. For instance, pursuant to Article R773-20 of the ISC, some of
the evidence submitted to the court for analysis may not be disclosed to
the other parties.

###### Proceedings Brought by a Person

*Who may refer a case before the CNCTR* Proceedings may be brought by
any person - after having filed a complaint to the CNCTR -, or by the
CNCTR itself, or the subject matter may be referred to in a preliminary
way by any administrative or judicial judge in the context of an ongoing
case, where the decision of the special court of the Council of State
affects such case.

*CNCTR, then Council of State* Therefore, in theory, the 2015
Intelligence Act opens the possibility for any person to obtain a
verification of the legality of intelligence techniques, without having
to bring evidence or to demonstrate standing, by first filing a
complaint to the CNCTR pursuant to Article L854-9 of the ISC\[54\], and
then by filing a case before the special court of the Council of State
Article L. 841-1\[55\].

The first step allows natural and legal persons to refer claims before
the CNCTR so that it “verif\[ies\] that no surveillance measure is
irregularly being directed against them”.

*The Council of State is not a judicial jurisdiction* The second one is
before the Council of State and stands for what could be compared to an
appeal court as persons may only refer their case before it after the
CNCTR has had a chance to verify their claims. Still, one point calls
for specification. The appeal provided by the Intelligence Act before
the Council of State is not a judicial remedy. Indeed, the Council of
State is the top of the administrative French apparatus, not the
judicial one. No special judicial review or remedy as been set up to
deal with intelligence related claims.

To finish, as already mentioned the CNCTR remains free to examine a case
on its own initiative, according to Article L. 854-9.

*Redress offered by the CNCTR* Redress offered by the CNCTR: - The
oversight body will neither confirm nor deny the legitimacy of any
possible surveillance; - If it deems the surveillance illegitimate it
“may” issue non-binding “recommendations” to obtain from the relevant
minister the termination of the surveillance and the deletion of the
collected intelligence. - If the CNCTR deems the measures following its
recommendations not satisfactory, its President of three of its members
may bring the case before the Council of
State.

###### The Flaws of the French Legal Framework Related to CNEs and Effective Remedy

The plausible violation of the Budapest Convention regarding hacking and
the transfer of hacking tools

*Plausible contravention of Budapest’s article 6* The sixth article of
the Budapest Convention of Cybercrime prevents countries from derogating
to their obligation to set up a legal framework regarding the transfer
of hacking tools. Yet precisely, as seen above, French provisions on the
matter - Article 323-3 and 323-8 of the Penal Code as well as Article L.
833-2 of the Internal Security Code (ISC) - imply or infer at transfers
of hacking tools without setting out a clear legal framework in order to
provide accountability or oversight.

*Plausible contravention of Budapest’s article 32* By the same token, in
order to harmonize and build up confidence between countries the
Convention’s Article 32 obliges services align with other countries’
authorities before resorting to techniques such as hacking. Then again,
French provisions above appear to be in contradiction with France’s
obligations towards other Parties to the main international law
instrument pertaining hacking\[56\].

# The Absence of Remedy Avenues Thereof

As it is inferred by Article L. 833-2 setting out the missions of the
French intelligence oversight body, there is no remedy avenue for
claimants fearing that a set of data or a hacking too transferred to
French intelligence services by “foreign agencies”. This has two
consequences. For a start, this very provision is blatantly in breach of
all France’s obligations vis-à-vis the right to an effective remedy. On
top of that, such a legal loophole incentivizes services to obtain
questionable intelligence gathering hacking tools or data through other
agencies. The High Commissioner for Human Rights report of 2014 sums
these concerning points by stressing that “\[a\] State cannot avoid its
human rights responsibilities simply by refraining from bringing those
powers within the bounds of law. To conclude otherwise would not only
undermine the universality and essence of the rights protected by
international human rights law, but may also create structural
incentives for States to outsource surveillance to each other.”\[57\].

Moreover, the 2015 International Surveillance Act creates a derogatory
regime where proceedings before the special court of the Council of
State in matters of surveillance of so-called “international
communications” may only be brought by the CNCTR, excluding any person
or any judge.

*No sanctions in case of abuse by the services* In the same way, Article
323-8 of the French Penal Code poses a serious threat to the principle
of legality, as well as it bypasses the fragile possibility that hacking
and the transfer of hacking tools could be sanctioned in case of abuse
by the services, when done to protect France’s interests aboard. Yet, as
hinted at, Article 323-8 is the only article of the Penal Code expressly
referring to services, even if it were only to create a derogation of
sanctions in case of abuse. It could be implicitly acknowledged that
other articles do cover the services’ activities. Nevertheless in the
case of hacking and transfer of hacking tools no article provides for
their sanction in case of abuse. A worthy detail considering the
sacrosanct criminal law principle requiring that any wrongdoing shall
not be sanctioned if it is not expressly associated with a sanction in
the law. In the context of the Penal Code’s article on hacking this
translates itself into a blanket impunity for services’ transfers of
hacking tools or their resort to such tools to gather intelligence in
case of abuse as well as an absence of criminal law remedy avenues.

A a consequence, potential claimants may not rest assured to have any
remedy nor reparation if they are collateral victims or victims of abuse
of hacking tools.

*French framework in contravention with EU standards* In short, under
many aspects the French legal provisions pertaining hacking blatantly
contravene European Courts’ interpretation of the EU Charter and the
European Convention on Human Rights, as well as international law,
regarding the right to an effective remedy and the right to reparation.

#### B) Confronting Theory with Practice: Current Proceedings

*Trying the 2015 Intelligence Act mechanisms* Careful attention shall
now be paid to proceedings brought in collaboration with “the
Exegetes”\[58\] gives an insightful and concrete view of the state of
proceedings linked to intelligence services activities in France.
Although no proceedings relating to intelligence services in France are
known to target hacking activities in particular, several proceedings
brought through the remedy avenues created by the 2015 Intelligence Act
shed light on the process.

##### Verifications Before the CNCTR

*M<sup>me</sup>A* The Exegetes volunteered to help a French citizen
(“M<sup>me</sup> B… A…”, hereafter M<sup>me</sup> A) put this in
practice.

First, M<sup>me</sup> A referred a claim to the CNCTR, for it to proceed
to all relevant checks to ensure “that no surveillance measure \[had
been or were still\] irregularly being directed against \[her\]”.

*Surprising checks* The claimant was asking the CNCTR to make sure she
had not been subject to illegal international surveillance between 2008
and December 2015, a period of time during which she had had numerous
contacts abroad. The claimant lodged her complaint to the CNCTR on
November 2, 2015. Almost one month later, on November 23, the CNCTR
answered with a letter asking for the numbers of all her phone lines to
check (but made no specific reference to other means of communications
such as Internet-based communications). The claimant answered with three
different phone lines on December 22. Surprisingly, the CNCTR notified
the claimant that it had proceeded with all relevant checks, in a letter
dated December 23. Such delay appears particularly short for an
administrative authority whose resources were deemed highly sufficient
by its former Director\[59\].

In practice, the notification from the CNCTR shall mean that it was
able, in less than 24 hours, to check with the DGSE\[60\] and with other
intelligence services who may retain data resulting from the DGSE
surveillance apparatus (there are currently 6 specialised intelligence
services pursuant to Decree no. 2015-1185), and to write a letter to
notify the claimant that it had proceeded with all checks — all of this
accomplished on the day before Christmas Eve.

*No appeal available* Second, M<sup>me</sup> A. filed a suit before the
Council of State relating to her complaint to the CNCTR. In its “Mme A.”
decision\[61\], the Council of State rejected the claim, stating that
since the claim pertains to international surveillance, the claimant had
no mean to appeal the CNCTR notification\[62\].

This portrays a gloomy insight of what the sole remedy avenue provided
for by the Intelligence Act of 2015 comes down to in practice. Not only
the oversight of eight years worth of communications with multiple
countries was done with a rare expeditiousness, but when appealing to
the Council of State, the latter found it had no jurisdiction to review
the case.

*Analogy in case of abuse of hacking tools* This remedy avenue echoes
the European courts’ case-law by illustrating the difference between the
mere provision of a remedy avenue and the setting up of mechanisms that
may effectively be activated and lead to proper reparation. This
experience of the Intelligence Act remedy avenue provides precious
information on the plausible fate of a claimant’s action in case of
damages or abuse of CNE by the services.

*A reckless treatment of sensitive rulings* On a side note, the
Exegetes’ article also denounces that the French Council of State sent
its decision to numerous journalists on its own initiative, without
anonymising it beforehand\[63\]. M<sup>me</sup> A was outraged by what
she felt was a deep lack of respect for citizens who took the risk to
expose their private life to the intelligence apparatus for the sake of
the rule of law and a more democratic society.

*Hacking victims should not be dealt with recklessly* In the context of
proceedings against use of hacking techniques, this could mean the
reckless unveiling of hacked individuals or corporations, or the
exposing of vulnerabilities, by the French top administrative
jurisdiction to journalists. Such behaviour of the French administration
would carry tremendous computer security threats for all computer users.
This may be the sign that the handling of Intelligence and hacking
related cases should be subject to strict official guidelines.

##### When No Remedy Avenue is Available

Another case led in collaboration with the Exegetes is worth mentioning
to draw an analogy with remedy avenues available for victims of damages
and/or abuse of hacking by the services.

*The in ’T Veld claim* This action opposes the Member of the European
Parliament (MEP) Sophia in ’t Veld to the French Intelligence
apparatus\[64\]. As a MEP, Ms in ’t Veld works between Brussels and
Strasbourg, as well as in her country, the Netherlands. Therefore, her
communications are inherently international. On 2 May 2016, she lodged a
complaint before the CNCTR\[65\], asking it to conduct a check in order
to make sure none of her communications had been unlawfully intercepted
under France’s international surveillance apparatus.

*The two in ’T Veld cases* In application of the remedy avenue presented
supra, after turning to the CNCTR the European parliamentarian referred
her case to the Council of State. Aware of the Constitutional Council’s
decision of November 2016\[66\] openly noting that the French legal
framework offers no possibility for persons to go to a judge in case of
international interceptions of communications, Ms in ’t Veld and the
Exegetes chose to bring two cases before the Council of State. One to
appeal the CNCTR - absence of - notification, and one on the grounds
that the French authority had exceeded its powers, through what is
called a *recours pour excès de pouvoir* (REP) remedy.

*Thinking outside the box: recourse to the REP* The REP remedy stands
for the ultimate safeguard of personal freedoms against the
administration. It is supposed to always remain an available remedy for
who deems his rights and freedoms violated by the French authority,
whether or not a law provides for this remedy avenue. To put it simply,
the second case was intended to prove the complete absence of remedy
before French jurisdictions. Either the Council of State was recognising
victims of international surveillance an ultimate remedy avenue in the
REP, or it would enshrine the absence of remedy for potential victims of
international surveillance. Either way, the Exegetes and MEP in ’t Veld
would obtain satisfaction as the first solution would provide France
with a minimum remedy, even if non-judicial, or the Council of State
would prove that France breaches its international and regional
obligations to offer an effective remedy to possible victims of
surveillance techniques.

This two-cases strategy chosen by the Exegetes and Ms in ‘t Veld shall
be an inspiration for possible future hacking related cases. Indeed,
apart from the Penal Code providing no remedy at all, the remedy
instituted by the Intelligence Act before the CNCTR could be the only
one available to direct victims of intelligence hacking. Yet, in the in
’t Veld and the Mme A. cases this remedy avenue has proven to be of
little use, if any. To remedy this tragic fact the Exegetes’ creativity
has the merit to have possibly paved the way for a new redress avenue.
In other words, the REP procedure could very well be the last resort of
every CNE abuse victim when no procedural remedy seems available.

###### Contravention with the Effective Remedy Standard

Lastly, the in ’t Veld cases - like the Mme A. one - raise several
procedural concerns regarding the right to an effective remedy.

*Possible interference with the right to fair trial* For a start, as
seen supra, the UN expressly associates the notion of effective remedy
to the fairness of trial. Yet, in ’t Veld’s attorney Me Hugo Roy might
not be allowed to speak or stay in the Council’s Chamber during
“hearings”\[67\]. This breach of the adversarial principle may be
interpreted as a gross encroachment on the right to a fair trial. Unlike
the UK’s security-cleared lawyers\[68\], France has no special attorneys
who may have the right to attend hearings subject to State secrecy
rules.

Moreover, the proceedings have lacked due process in several aspects.

First of all, Article R. 773-30 of the French Administrative Justice
Code provides that if the CNCTR has not conducted its checks and
answered to the claimant in a two month window following the date of the
claimant’s first letter, the later may bring a case before the Council
of State at the end of a four month window after the claimant’s original
letter. In the in ’t Veld cases the MEP’s letter was sent to the CNCTR
on 2 May 2016. With no answer from the CNCTR, the MEP had to wait until
2 September to lodge an appeal before the Council of State.

On the 3rd of September, the CNCTR had produced no answer. For this
reason, the following days Ms in ’t Veld lodged a complaint before the
Council. On the 3rd of October Ms in ’t Veld received an answer from the
CNCTR dating back from 13 September. Surprisingly in their following
exchanges with the administration, represented by the Prime Minister,
the later does not seem to consider the oversight body’s timeliness
questionable\[69\].

*Exceptionally short time to produce legal briefs* In addition, when the
MEP lodged her appeal before the Council of State, she was soon notified
by a letter of the Council of State dating back of the 5th of October
2016. This letter warned her that unlike usual procedures leaving three
months to the claimant between the introduction of the case and the
production of her first legal brief, her defence brief was due one month
from the date of the letter. Not only this delay could seem unfair in a
case where there are no precedents, but more importantly, the shortening
of the delay for an exceptionally complex case cannot be deemed
reasonable. To top it all, it must be stressed that before the 9th of
March 2017 MEP in ’t Veld had no attorney to represent her. Meaning any
legally unadvised citizen would have been severely strained in terms of
procedure. These facts appear in no way aligned with the due process
principle.

*Pending preliminary ruling* The 9th of March attorney Me Roy was chosen
by the claimant to represent her before the Council of State. On the
14th of March he has sent to the Council a second brief in which he,
inter alia, raised a question asking for an ECJ preliminary ruling on
effective remedy grounds.

*The in ’t Veld cases are still pending.* Ms in ’t Veld had to produce
her answer before the 23rt of March 2015, for a hearing initially
envisaged in March. Yet, the hearing date has been postponed several
times. These facts appear to indicate an encroachment on the effective
remedy principle and a skewed equality of arms, to the disadvantage of a
European citizen seeking to ensure she had not been subject to illegal
surveillance.

The study of the pending in ’t Veld cases provides us with concrete
evidence that the current French legal framework is far from in line
with basic procedural rights enshrined by European fundamental rights
stipulations, let alone international applicable instruments.

There is little chance that a citizen victim of or seeking to ensure she
has not been subject to illegal hacking would be guaranteed to
experience more respectful proceedings. As a matter of fact, chances are
it would be even more complicated as data obtained by way of hacking
techniques could be easily obtained from an other countries’ agency,
preventing the CNCTR from conducting even the slightest legality or
legitimacy check. Not to mention that intelligence services hacking is
usually thought to leave no digital evidence.

Put together, France’s framework and past or pending cases yield us with
multiple grounds for concerns in terms of the availability of an
effective remedy to potential victims of hacking by intelligence
services.

To conclude, the legal framework of this chosen Budapest Convention
ratifier seems to shows a lack of respect of the legality principle. For
instance, the recourse to exchange of CNE and CNA tools between
intelligence services, nationally as well as internationally, is absent
of most national frameworks. Despite its dangerousness and its possible
impact on every end-user’s computer around the globe (see the Stuxnet
worm, infra). On this mater France is an interesting exception, as it
expressly refers to data shared by other countries’ Intelligence
services. Though it is worth stressing that this mention is made for the
only purpose of derogating received data from the CNCTR’s oversight.
This derogation, while openly creating an incentive for services to ask
favours of allies to provide them with somehow questionable
intelligence, is a severe breach of the effective remedy principle since
the French national administrative authority is hence deprived from the
ability to pursue checks on behalf of claimants. By the same token, the
French Penal Code carries a blanket impunity for agents recieving or
transfering CNE tools “\[t\]o ensure the protection of the fundamental
interests of the Nation \[…\] outside the national territory” (art.
323-8 CSI). While this provision stands for a critical breach of the
Budapest Convention’s Article 6, it must be underscored that other
Parties to the Convention’s silence on the matter does not imply they do
not play along the same lines. On the contrary.

*The French framework echoed the EU Parliament’s findings* This
observation is echoed by the 2014 report on National Security and Secret
Evidence in Legislation and before the Courts ordered by the civil
liberties Committee the European Parliament (LIBE). This independent
expert study found that EU Member States’ current frameworks carry a
clear risk that the executive and secret services may act arbitrarily,
partly because of the recourse to the slack and too nebulously defined
“national security” ground. The report additionally put emphasis on
transnational intelligence practices and cooperation, to stress their
need to be brought into line with the ECJ and ECtHR rule of law
standards. The expert also pointed out that “States secrets too often
‘over-protect’ the executive from proper accountability and oversight
in cases of wrongdoing and fundamental rights interferences. \[…\] The
reliance on intelligence materials is thus too often based on a
presumption that governmental agencies are acting in good faith \[…\].”
Leading the experts to conclude their report by stressing that the
“increasing number of cases revealing unlawful practices by secret
services and governments demonstrate the need for a more careful
assessment by judicial authorities.”\[70\]

### 3\) Unbattered Redress Avenues

The very core of the notion of right bears with it the obligation to
redress its violation. This is even more necessary in a context where it
may be considerably intricate to hold services responsible for CNEs they
have indirectly ordered. Indeed, French newspaper Liberation has shown
that services do not hesitate to abuse skilled individuals by making
promises they do not attend to keep in exchange of CNE services. In its
article\[71\], Liberation shows the example of a gifted asylum seeker
who hoped to become French. Intelligence services reached him to offer
asylum in exchange of the CNE of a library where soon-to-be ISIS members
where suspected to communicate via freely available computers. The young
asylum seeker did his part of the bargain and obtained the needed
evidence, but the services never reached him out again. This outsourcing
of CNEs on private individuals, especially a non-European individual,
make it next to impossible to use any specialised remedy avenue. For
this reason, unbattered redress avenues shall be contemplated. 

#### A) Data Protection 

As EU case-law illustrates it, the question of hacking by the services
is intertwined with the question of the protection of natural persons’
private shpere. As a result, EU Data Protection law could provide with
complementariy avenues in the newly adopted Privacy Shield decision or
the 2016 General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).

##### The Ombudsman Avenue Set Up by the Privacy Shield

*Referral before the informal panel* The Privacy Shield Implementing
Decision\[72\] is meant to provide safeguards for the commercial
transfer of personal data between the US and Europe. Among these
safeguards it has enabled the European Data Protection Authorities
(DPAs) to set up in 2017 a remedy avenue for individuals fearing to have
been subject to unlawful surveillance. The undeniable strength of this
mechanism resides in the possibility for any individuals to obtain a
verification of the legality of intelligence techniques, without having
to bring evidence or to demonstrate standing, by simply filing a
complaint referred to an “Informal Panel” of national DPAs. This Panel
would then be free to investigate or relay the complaint to the US
authorised authorities\[73\].

Unfortunately, so far the potential of such avenue remains uncertain as
the relief they could offer to victims is unsettled and, most
importantly, the Privacy Shield may be struck down by the ECJ as it
fails to comply with the findings made by the Grand Chamber in the
*Schrems* (C-362/14) ECJ, g. ch., Oct. 6, 2015 ruling\[74\].

##### Potential Remedies Offered by the GDPR\[75\]

Likewise, the GDPR offers avenues to refer potential encroachments
before an authority and, in fine, a judicial jurisdiction. The
enforceability of GDPR avenues make then seem a most preferable solution
to consider for a potential victim of abusive or damaging hacking by the
services.

*Obligation to compensate in the GDPR* First, pursuant to article
82(1)\[76\] of the GDPR on the Right to Compensation and Liability, it
the processor or the controller’s responsibility to repair any material
or non-material damage caused to a person - a data subject - as a result
of an infringement of this Regulation. This particular provision shall
be read in the light of article 32, laying down a positive duty for
processors and controllers to “implement appropriate technical and
organisational measures to ensure a level of security appropriate to the
risk”. In that sense, it could be interpreted that certain sets of data,
due to their sensitivity, could be foreseeably be targeted by any
country’s intelligence service and hence require special security
measures. To use the aforementioned case of Belgacom, the GDPR could
possibly let a judge ground on article 32 its interpretation and
analysis of the telecom operator’s security measures implemented and
conclude it has to provide additional security measures since it is the
entry point to access EU institutions’ staff communications.

*The GDPR provides for effective judicial remedy* Secondly, pursuant to
article 78 and 79 of the GDPR natural persons may respectively seek
“effective judicial remedy” against Supervisory authorities as well as
processors or controllers.

In cases pertaining to direct or indirect hacking by the services French
data subjects could for instance envisage bringing a case before a court
against the French DPA on the ground that it should have sanctioned
French authorities from contracting with Hacking team, the Italian
hacking services provider\[77\].

In like manner, European data subjects could envisage to sue a
controller if she could reasonably assume that the processor she had
contracted with no longer presented the necessary technical securities
to shield if from an plausible/expectable hack.

#### B) Civil Law

Aside from data protection law, the most promising avenue to enjoy an
effective remedy could be through civil law.

The analysis of the French framework above allows to draw clear
conclusions. As intelligence services agents shall not be held
criminally liable for their hacks, services may still be held liable
before civil law judges. Yet to pursue civil law avenues, a person would
not only have to prove she has been a victim, but would additionally
have to prove a causality link between the harm suffered and the
services’ hacking. This critical criterion might turn out to be an
unreasonably cumbersome and unfavourable one in such a case.

Along with unpractical direct remedy avenues against services, one must
ponder on indirect remedy avenues.

##### The Insurance Sector

*Dangerous promises for insurers* The insurance sector comes inevitably
to mind. Insurance-wise there are two scenarios. Either the insurer is
bound by contract to the end-user, or he is contractually bound to the
service provider through which the attack has been carried out. As an
instance, the AXA cyber insurance comprises the suppression of pieces of
ransomware programs from their corporate clients’ computers\[78\]. Yet
what characterises zero-days is that no computer scientist has ever
heard of such software vulnerability. It may take months for a digital
forensic expert to spot and fix a zero-day, especially one obfuscated by
expert teams of hackers financed by a nation-state. It seems unrealistic
to assure the “suppression of ransomware programs” from clients’
computers in a context of State sponsored cyberweapons. It equivalents
to insuring corporations against shells at a time of war, on a territory
that may be bombed any day.

Besides, cyberinsurers usually all cover ransomware - also referred to
as cyberextortion. Nevertheless, in their contracts insurers usually
specify they will only cover foreseeable attacks. Therefore, the main
angle to benefit from their business liability is the one of negligence,
hardly invokable in practice.

If they were to be silent on such foreseeable attacks, insurers could
turn to the reassurance sector. Even if the chances for such contracts
to attract buyers willing to be transferred the risk are tremendously
slim\[79\] in a context where governments hold secret exploits of
vulnerabilities breaking the security of most common computer devices.

These considerations beg the question: should the insurance sector be in
charge of paying for the damages caused by the zero-days bought or
discovered by governments with taxes?

##### The IT Security Sector

*The security sector stands out on matters of liability.* In
Amalfitano’s book\[80\], he argues that the tortious liability of
heads of legal persons seems especially furture-proof on matters of risk
and prevention, such as the security serctor providing services to
companies or insurers. These private legal persons or their
representatives must be aware of the risks born by the handling of
certain data or equipments. Not acting in accordance should engage their
tortious or their business liability.

*Sophos and WannaCrypt.* The tragic events known by NHS trusts in
England are of particular interest. Yes UK politicians had chosen to
free the NHS from its ties with Microsoft by not resuming the contract
between the company and the British administration. In that sense,
British politicians could be seen as negligent\[81\]. Yet their role is
to act in accordance with their voters’ will, not to be IT specialists.
Yes, NHS Trusts’ IT security provider, Sophos, had then to compose with
servers whose software would rapidly be obsolete. Nonetheless, as the
security provider of infrastructure dealing with “data concerning
health”\[82\], Sophos should have relentlessly alerted authorities to
pivot for a new software provider. Indeed, the company is in a position
of warranty and control vis-à-vis third persons. Their clients recourse
to their services because they cannot protect themselves independently
due to their lack of education and know-how on the matter\[83\].

In that sense it could appear possible for victims to invoke the
company’s business liability, raising its plausible negligence.

##### Thoughts on Free and Open Software

*A liable maintainance provider* However, the NHS Trusts episode being
intertwined with the debate on EU countries’ dependency on
Microsoft\[84\], it allows us to consider options from a remedy avenues
perspective. A recurring fear regarding the private sector’s reliance on
free software is the impression that no liability could be invoked
before a judge in case of harm. This fear is groundless. Yes, if
end-users use the Linux Mint distribution based on Debian\[85\], they
will not be able to invoke anybody’s liability in case of harm, but by
using a community-driven operating system at no charge one could hardly
expect for more. Conversely, if a company relies on a particular
operating system or software to conduct its business or has particular
IT security needs, it may certainly afford to pay a maintainance
provider. The difference being whether it chooses to turn to a free or a
non-free software provider and/or maintainer. A free-software support
provider example is the Oracle company.

*No lock-in effect* The advantage of free or open software providers and
maintainers is the avoidance of “lock-in” effects. Typically in the
WannaCrypt example, the difficulty for Trusts is that they have been
running proprietary software preventing their IT teams to study their
program or modify their functionalities. Worst, Trusts could not easily
change their maintainance provider to find a cheaper one without having
to run on a completely new server software. If the NHS had been running
an open software they could have turned to a more competitive
maintainance provider to make cuts, without switching to some new
software. That way, the WannaCrypt attack would not have infected the
hospitals’ network, patients would not have suffered any harm and
politicians would have made harmless cuts. In short, the recourse to
open or free software is more future-proof than proprietary ones since
their cost-effectiveness make them less subject to political budget
cuts.

To sum up, with reserves on their effectiveness as none of these avenues
have been tried to this day, data protection as well as civil law appear
to provide for remedy avenues that could be experimented. To afford a
strengthened protection to digital services users, and to rebuild their
confidence, it must still be underlined that the legal person’s
liability remains to be harmonised. It is so EU-wide as well as in the
entire world, in particular when it is associated with sectors carrying
international stakes.\[86\] The IT security sector being the priority.

### Conclusion:

Even if the right to an effective remedy is soundly provided for in
international, regional law and in European jurisdictions’ case-law,
national laws remain fragmented and worst, do not implement either this
human rights principle nor the Cybercrime Convention when it comes to
intelligence services hacking. Unfortunately, impunity to hack or the
failure of national legal systems to bring to justice perpetrators or
negligent actors\[87\] is a central hurdle to guaranteeing the
protection of fundamental rights. As a matter of facts, as services may
even be emboldened by the absence of legal consequences.

That being said, even if remedy avenues were to be available and access
to judge was feasible, this does not suffice as a safeguard in case of
abuse. As mentioned above, the UN and the ICCPR portray the effective
remedy criterion as twofold. Effectiveness may only be deemed met if
oversight and judicial reviews are available and reparations obtained in
case of abuse are satisfactory. For this reason this paper shall now
focus on compensations for victims, may they be direct or
indirect.

<clearpage>

## Illusory Compensations for Victims of Services’ Hacking or Hacking Tools

In criminal law, judges sanction culprits with punitive damages. These
damages are meant to mend the harm brought to society as a whole\[88\].
Whereas in civil law judges aim to compensate the material injury or the
non-pecuniary damage. Yet in the context of hacking the damages
inflicted to society as a whole in terms of confidence in governments or
the private sector are colossal. So is the encroachment on end-users’
right to personal data protection and private life, or even physical
equipment.

As mentioned above, the effective remedy notion finds its essence only
if one mirrors it with the compensations obtained by victims at the end
of the day. This calls for an overview of damages and potential
compensations, as well as an objective reflection on how could
satisfactory compensations be structurally ensured for victims. This
implies to consider the due process principle in the perspective of
compensating victims of state hacking. Before doing so, the very notion
of “victim” shall be examined, in general international law as well as
in the context of intelligence services hacking.

### 1\) Damages and Losses Suffered

#### A) Typology of Victims

*Definition of the term victim.* The UN’s Basic Principles and
Guidelines on remedy and reparation define the notion of victim at
articles 8 and 9\[89\]. This UN definition shall be the one referred to
in this paper as it encompasses victims of mental harm, direct as well
as indirect victims and it specifies that one does not need to be
associated to a named perpetrator to be granted the status of victim.

##### Direct Victims

*Countries.* Countries are direct targets of cyberweapons comprising
exploits. These weapons increasingly aim at critical infrastructure,
like transportation, healthcare, telecommunications, energy grids or
plants and financial services. The Stuxnet malicious software, or
“malware”, illustrates this. The NSA and the Mossad teamed together to
attack Iran’s nuclear facility of Natanz. The program’s payload\[90\]
was to take control of uranium enrichment centrifuges to make them spin
to their point of failure, in order to generate physical damages to the
facility. The long-term goal being to slow down the Iranian nuclear
programme and to make the country incur unexpectedly heavy costs. An
other illustration is the attack on Ukrainian power centers in 2015.
This attack was the first one in history to take down an entire power
grid\[91\].

*Organisations.* Like countries, organisations are direct targets of
intelligence services hacking tools such as the Animal Farm’s Tafalcou
and Babar\[92\]. Every attack is scrupulous. Tafalcou would infect a
computer network, and Babar would be sent to take profit of the
infection and spy on governmental organisations and humanitarian
organisations\[93\] between 2011 and 2013, as explained by the Kaspersky
Lab\[94\]. The Animal Farm is or was a state group suspected by Canadian
intelligence services to be French\[95\].

*Businesses.* Businesses can be an ideal entry point to reach other
persons’ communications. The aforementioned example of GCHQ’s CNE of the
Belgacom telecommunication operator illustrates this perfectly. In order
to access EU institutions’ staff communications the easiest way for
intelligence services was to hack a point from where all communications
had to transit. Internet Access or Service Providers are hence a prey of
choice.

*Individuals.* Lastly, individuals are very often a direct target of
intelligence services as they constitute the three categories above.
Like businesses, they are an entry point. When the US and Israel were
trying to infiltrate Natanz they had to primarily infect a programmer’s
computer as the Natanz facility was air gaped, that is to say a
voluntarily standalone network not connected to the internet for IT
security reasons. To infect the facility the services firstly had to
spot who was in charge of software updates and then infect his personal
computer, that would at some point be connected to a programmable logic
controller (PLC)\[96\] or infect the PLCs via a usb-key used to
transport updates\[97\]. 

##### Indirect Victims

Of all intelligence services CNE tools victims, the most numerous are
the indirect ones.

*Unpredictable enormous costs born by the private sector* Businesses and
community projects must be capable of gathering and spending - in utter
urgency - thousands of costly man-hours patching vulnerabilities. Not
regular vulnerabilities. Vulnerabilities so scarce, unknown and embedded
in major brands’ equipment that services invested millions to obtain,
and associate them with detrimental exploits. Whenever an intelligence
service’s exploit is published online\[98\], businesses throughout the
globe must work round the clock to understand and fix their products, or
their client’s security is put at great danger. These unpredictable
exploit publications are impossible to take into account in a yearly
budget and can be fatal to businesses as they necessitate considerable
energy, time and money resources. Even if companies are not related to
the IT sector they may be impacted, as it was the case for several
factories of the car producer Renault during the WannaCrypt
attack\[99\]. Private companies should not have to bear this cost nor
the life and death urgency stress it casts on them, as it puts their
very existence at stake. If services were to keep their hacking
practices in the future, coupled with the inevitable overbidding spiral
accompanying it, it is of utmost importance that we find legal ways to
repair their consequential damages on companies, be they inflicted to
property, non-pecuniary or lost incomes and benefits. 

*Individuals evenly struck indirectly by services’ hacking tools.*
Individuals suffer extensive damages when they are the customers of
affected companies or equipments, such as the users of the Microsoft
products that had not updated their machinebefore the WannaCrypt attack.
WannaCrypt also tremendously impacted the lives of all NHS patients when
the worm infected the British Trusts. Emergency patients have even been
redirected towards other hospitals, or their schedules were postponed to
the following week. Ukrainians deprived from power in the heart of
winter too were most probably consequential victims of intelligence
services hacking. Finally, it is too rarely underlined that the Stuxnet
worm had a response team at Natanz and there are theories that some
nuclear scientists assassinated after the attack were members of this
team\[100\]. If it is so, there were undeniably consequential victims of
the launch of the intelligence service’s Stuxnet hacking tool. With the
assassination of civilians comes third-party damages suffered by the
person’s relatives. These non-pecuniary losses should all be accounted
for too. 

#### B) Observed Damages: a Striking Diversity of Damages Caused

With this variety of victims comes a variety of damages
caused.

##### Damages Caused by the Launch of Cyberweapons by Intelligence Services or the Transfer of Sacking Tools by Services

*The Stuxnet case.* In the case of Stuxnet, damages suffered were
twofold. On the one hand there was the wreaking havoc of Natanz’s
centrifuges, the plausible assassinations and threats\[101\] of
scientists working to understand and fix the software the enrichment was
relying on, and the third party damages suffered by relatives of
victims. On the other hand were all the private sector companies that
had to struggle against the malware after its second launch by Israel
went wrong and it spread globally\[102\]. Plus their customers
world-wide.

##### Damages Caused by the Stealth of Cyberweapons Developed by Intelligence Services

*The WannaCrypt case.* In the case of WannaCrypt the question of
liability may be even more tedious as damages were caused by the stealth
and the rewriting of malevolent programs with the NSA’s EternalBlue
piece of code. As mentioned above, damages have been extremely various,
ranging from NHS emergency patients’ having to dash to other hospitals
or cancer patients having to wait few more days before their next X-ray
treatment, to companies like FedEX who have seen their routine
operations hampered by the virus\[103\]. Not to forget the millions of
people throughout the world who chose to pay the ransom demanded by the
malware in hope to see their files unencrypted.

As they keep on buying priceless zero-days on the darkweb and put
enormous resources in developing stable types of malware, intelligence
services will always be a target of choice. This observation
incidentally begs for the recognition of victims’ right to be
compensated and to obtain damages, for the stealth of cyberweapons is
not ready to end.

### 2\) Right to a Satisfactory Compensation

#### A) From a United Nations Perspective

*The right to reparation as a human right principle and a component of
the effective remedy notion.* The aforementioned Principles and
Guidelines of 2005 associate reparation to the principles of
accountability, justice and the rule of law. Alongside this association,
the UN enshrines this right as a building block of a strengthened
protection of human rights throughout the globe. According to the
stipulations of the Guidelines, victims must be afforded adequate,
effective, full and prompt reparation, proportional to the gravity of
the violation and harm they have suffered.

The Guidelines go in detail in their description of what the right to
reparation entails. First, pursuant to article 15 of the Guidelines “a
State shall provide reparation to victims for acts or omissions which
can be attributed to the State”. The expression “attributed to the
State” is fortunate regarding hacking as the general observed trend is
the recourse to State sponsored hacking. Article 15’s wording appears
future-proof as it allows for an interpretation encompassing damages or
harm directly or indirectly inflicted.

As of harm and losses that might not be legally linkable to the
services, such as the harm caused by the insertion of one of their
zero-day exploit in the WannaCrypt malware, the Guidelines lay down a
two steps mechanism. First, when a natural person, a legal person, or an
other entity is found liable for reparation to a victim, she may be
guaranteed reparation by the State. After that, the Guidelines expressly
allow State parties to be compensated by the person or entity liable.

Besides, States ought to enforce the right to reparation, even if it was
recognised by a foreign ruling, as long as it is recognised valid by an
independent court.

Forms of reparation include - but are not limited to - “restitution,
compensation, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of
non-repetition”. Every one of these notions is scrupulously defined from
article 19 to 23 of the Guidelines. Of these definitions is it worth
noting that victims must be guaranteed compensation for “economically
assessable damage”. While satisfaction implies inter alia the cessation
of violations, the verification of facts, the public disclosure of the
truth, public apologies, judicial and administrative sanctions and the
inclusion of an accurate account of the violations\[104\].

#### B) From a Criminal and Civil Law Perspective

From a criminal law point of view, conduct considered harmful to society
ought to be prohibited by statute and associated with sanctions\[105\].
Damages have a punitive value. Whereas from a civil law point of view
reparation shall cover, and be restricted to, the very non-pecuniary
losses or the damages inflicted to property in order to restore as far
as possible the situation existing before the breach.

What distinguishes these two approaches the most in terms of redress is
that the civil law principle allows by essence for much higher
compensations. In addition, they intrinsically differ because
international criminal law holds as a sacrosanct principle that no one
may be punished for someone else’s wrongdoings\[106\]. It is the
opposite in civil law, hence the thriving of the insurance sector.

Yet in the case of computer network exploitation by intelligence
services both perspectives seem relevant, as the reckless use or abuse
of the ability to hack one natural and legal persons’ systems has
tremendously intrusive consequences. Consequences harmful to society as
a whole, as well as often associated with property or non-pecuniary
losses.

#### C) European Case-law

Article 41 of the ECHR provides that “\[i\]f the \[ECtHR\] Court finds
that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols
thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned
allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if
necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”

As seen above, European jurisdictions have rendered numerous rulings
asserting that undue or unlawful surveillance represents too much of an
encroachment on fundamental rights to remain unrepaired. Nonetheless, on
multiple occasions the ECtHR has opted to issue no monetary compensation
to plaintiffs coming before it with surveillance cases, only to deem
that symbolic nominal damages were sufficient.

*The Zakharov ruling* As an instance in the *Zakharov* ruling, the
“Court consider\[ed\] that the finding of a violation constitutes
sufficient just satisfaction for any non-pecuniary damage caused to the
applicant.” For this reason this secret surveillance case intertwined
with the recognition of a lack of effective remedy avenues in the
respondent country was repaired by a mere finding that a violation had
taken place and that the claimant’s proved expenses would be reimbursed.

Likewise, in the *Gillan* ruling the Court sided with the British
Government and decided that “the finding of a violation constitutes
sufficient just satisfaction in the circumstances of the present case”
(*Gillan v. the United Kingdom* (4158/05) ECtHR, 4<sup>th</sup> sect.,
Jan. 12, 2010, para. 94)

In the *Pruteanu* ruling the appellant was granted 4 500 € for his
non-pecuniary losses, but this amount was pertaining to his status of
attorney, whose communications with his client should not have been used
as evidence in proceedings.

*Rulings to adapt to today’s technical context* Although the Court’s
rulings are clear, resort to CNE and CNA by the services has never been
the subject of its cases and services are increasingly using CNE and
worst, are now often aiming at sabotaging physical equipment. Judicial
jurisdictions are bound to allow for more substantial reparations, or
the private sector will remain at the mercy of security failures of
intelligence services around the globe. The WannaCrypt malware
constitutes a perfect example, as the Shadow Brokers stole the NSA
exploit EternalBlue during summer 2016, published it in March 2017, and
malicious hackers inserted it in a ransomware before throwing it on the
internet. To continue with this example, its impact on civilians’
confidence in their administrations, their hospitals, and their
computers may never fully restore or worst, leave permanent trauma. Not
to mention the enormous losses inflicted to legal persons. In this
paradigm shift symbolic nominal damages may hardly be regarded as
sufficient.

### 3\) Towards Securing Satisfactory Reparations

This last chapter ambitions to participate to the current academic
debate on the recourse to state hacking, by way of insights on paths
that could lead to satisfactory reparations. To do so one would first
have to sift through potentially available redress avenues to focus on
the ones carrying the soundest chances to prove effective and to provide
victims with relief. To finish by an overview of potential improvements
available to due process conditions in secret surveillance related
cases.

#### A) Which Redress Avenues to Choose and on What Grounds

As seen earlier, it seems there are or will soon be several potential
remedy avenues available for cases related to intelligence services’
resort to CNEs. Yet not all of them seem to lead to satisfactory
reparations.

*The Privacy Shield avenue shall not be prioritised* To begin with, the
Privacy Shield avenue before the Informal Panel, even if not yet
available or experimented, might not prove satisfactory. It most
certainly will offer an avenue to make one’s voice heard by DPAs, but
chances to obtain the cessation of violations by the US surveillance
apparatus, a public apology or administrative or judicial sanctions seem
improbable.

*The GDPR offers sound promises* The GDPR, pursuant to article 79, seems
more likely to lead to reparations decided by a judge. This regulation’s
avenue remains to be experimented, but the enforceability on European
legal persons makes no doubt as regulations are an EU law binding
legislative act that must be applied in its entirety and its provisions
may directly be invoked before national judges in Member States. Between
actions against DPAs and actions against controllers or processors, the
latter may be far more preferable as judges may be more inclined to
grant pecuniary reliefs to victims.

*Civil law avenues to prioritise* In like manner, general domestic civil
avenues against corporations possibly bear the most substantial chances
of success in term of satisfactory reparation, for the same reasons.
Especially if the claimant is a consumer and the respondent is an IT
security company. Plus, civil law judges are generally more inclined
than criminal law ones to award generous compensations to victims. That
said, they should be associated with criminal law claims to maximise
chance to see victims relieved.

In a nutshell, it is merely the avenues against corporations that may
seem the most promising in terms of satisfactory reparations.
Nevertheless, if a potential victim was to seek for relief, no avenues
should be left unbattered. One could rather say it is a matter of
prioritisation, as no avenue should be left unexplored.

Yet as already highlighted, general international civil law imposes the
provision of a strict causality link between the harm or losses suffered
and a third-party’s positive action, or lack of action. Prerequisite
that could appear far too cumbersome in cases of hacking by the
services, an intrusive surveillance technique that is not only secret,
but meant to leave no evidence. As a result, the due process principle,
when applied to hacking pertaining to intelligence services, shall
encompass particular guarantees.

#### B) Honing Due Process Conditions

Possible victims of hacking must be granted particular procedural
attention. This can be inferred from article 4 of the EU directive
2012/29/UE, providing that EU Members’ must afford victims
individualized attention “depending on the specific needs and personal
circumstances of the victim and the type or nature of the crime”. In
cases pertaining to direct or indirect hacking by intelligence services,
specific needs of victims could primarily encompass exceptional means
devoted to investigations and digital forensic as well as substantially
lightened standing criterion to assess harm. Yet to ensure due process
in this type of cases prior safeguards must be secured as well.

##### Investigations: Crucial on Hacking Cases

*Basic principles regarding evidence are hindered* The expert report on
the use of secrecy in proceeding in Europe concluded that “the reliance
on intelligence materials is \[…\] too often based on a presumption that
governmental agencies are acting in good faith”\[107\]. Particular
attention should thus be paid to the fact that it is next to impossible
for direct or indirect victims of hacking by the services to honour the
basic civil law principle that who comes before a court pretending to
have suffered a damage caused by a third party must prove it.

*CNE and CNA tools meant to leave no evidence* It is a fact,
intelligence services develop hacking tools to hide the malware\[108\]
they use to collect information. Mindful of this, it should be echoed
with the declaration of Privacy International (PI) counsel Mr. Jaffey in
the course of PI’s legal action against GCHQ’s hacking: “If state
authorities are permitted to alter or impair the operation of a
computer, the reliability and admissibility of such evidence will be
called into question”\[109\]. This observation is in line with Article
14(1)\[110\] of the Budapest Convention and reinforced by the
conclusions of UN Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of
the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression’s report in 2013. In his
report, he denounces “\[o\]ffensive intrusion software such as Trojans,
or mass interception capabilities, constitut\[ing\] such serious
challenges to traditional notions of surveillance that they cannot be
reconciled with existing laws on surveillance and access to private
information. There are not just new methods for conducting surveillance;
they are new forms of surveillance. From a human rights perspective, the
use of such technologies is extremely disturbing. Trojans, for example,
not only enable a State to access devices, but also enable them to alter
– inadvertently or purposefully – the information contained therein.
This threatens not only the right to privacy but also procedural
fairness rights with respect to the use of such evidence in legal
proceedings.”\[111\] This last point has consistently been shone a light
on by the French cybercriminal law advisor of the Interior Ministry,
judge Quéméner\[112\] acknowledging that digital proofs are subject to
acute questioning in courts. One cannot but fully agree with the fact
that the reliability of proofs is a milestone of a fair trial. To
reconcile this and fundamental rights, courts should enshrine a right to
meticulous and methodical investigation of hacking complaints, in
particular when they might pertain to intelligence services activity.

This way, more reliable evidence would underpin the parties’ arguments
and countries may find themselves less reluctant to uphold the
adversarial principle in the context of surveillance-related legal
actions. On top of that, the services’ operations would tremendously
gain in legitimacy in the public’s eye.

*Duty to investigate* The concrete upholding of a right to particularly
meticulous investigations when plausible victims seek remedy avenues is
a duty for Parties. Indeed, pursuant to article 3(b) of the UN Basic
Principles and Guidelines, States must “\[i\]nvestigate violations
effectively, promptly, thoroughly and impartially and, where
appropriate, take action against those allegedly responsible in
accordance with domestic and international law. This duty is even
reinforced by Article 4, that expressly provides that”States have the
duty to investigate". Yet, it goes without saying that such
investigations, to be deemed effective, ought to be associated with
robust independence safeguards.

Investigations would enable to and should go hand in hand with the
establishment of sanctions to companies providing, buying or praising
the recourse to hacking tools. These sanctions would have to be fines
indexed on the company’s worldwide turnover, in analogy with the GDPR’s
rationale that sanctions shall now take into account globalisation of
businesses. Hacking being a borderless calamity, a fund could be in
charge of the management of the sums gathered with fines and be in
charge of redistributing it among investigating teams of countries and
(international) organisations and, by the same token, victims. This
redistribution mechanism could allow for a sound and healthy competition
among private and public sectors and would not prevent citizens of
countries with lesser resources or different spending strategies from
benefiting of the digital forensic provided to build a safer digital
space. Lastly, for the sake of right to information as well as
transparency, publication of sanctions could provide an effective
incentive for companies not to engage in such
activities.

##### Standing and Notification of Harm: a Prerequisite for a Satisfactory Compensation?

In order to secure access to remedies for victims, they must be given
effective access to counsel. If the lack of evidences makes it
unappealing for a private counsel of an organisation to provide them
with legal advise, victims will be deprived from their right to bring
their claims before a judge or an oversight body. Especially in the
context of State hacking, where proceedings are particularly technical.
For this reason, it is crucial that claimants be granted lighter
standing prerequisites.

*Knowing one’s rights have been interfered with* That said, victims of
hacking equally need be aware of their damage or its source for their
right to effective remedy to be safeguarded. To fulfill this condition,
it is first and foremost necessary that they be given the chance to know
if and when they have been subject to hacking. This is in line with the
ECHR’s interpretation opted for the judges in the *Klass versus Germany*
case, where they held that “\[t\]he Court finds it unacceptable that the
assurance of the enjoyment of a right guaranteed by the Convention could
be thus removed by the simple fact that the person concerned is kept
unaware of its violation.”\[113\]. In the *Zakharov* case judges went
further, by affirming that “The Court concludes \[…\] that the remedies
referred to by the Government are available only to persons who are in
possession of information about the interception of their
communications. Their effectiveness is therefore undermined by the
absence of a requirement to notify the subject of interception at any
point, or an adequate possibility to request and obtain information
about interceptions from the authorities. Accordingly, the Court finds
that Russian law does not provide for an effective judicial remedy
against secret surveillance measures in cases where no criminal
proceedings were brought against the interception subject.” They even
specify that “after the surveillance has been terminated, the question
of subsequent notification of surveillance measures is inextricably
linked to the effectiveness of remedies before the courts and hence to
the existence of effective safeguards against the abuse of monitoring
powers”\[114\].

In other words, in light of the ECtHR case-law the shadow of a doubt
regarding hacking by the services is no longer possible: notification
requirements are necessary for a country to be deemed to comply with
article 13 of the ECHR.

In that sense too, disclosures must be legally provided for, depending
on the dangerousness and the time passed since the dossier is closed. By
the same token, gagging orders shall be accompanied with the duty for
services to let persons and legal persons participate to transparence
reports after some time. This is critical to mend the public’s distrust.

##### Right to Information Earlier On

*Knowing violations and remedy avenues exist* Last but not least,
pursuant to article 11(c) of the aforementioned UN Guidelines of 2005,
States have an active duty to provide persons with “\[a\]ccess to
relevant information concerning violations and reparation mechanisms”.
It is indeed necessary for one to be aware of his rights and their
possible infringement to protect them. This goes hand in hand with being
practically aware of means to redress such violations. 

<clearpage>

### Conclusion

The basic effective remedy principle, even if robustly enshrined in
international and regional law and case-law, can barely be said to be
assured to direct or indirect victims of the recourse to hacking tools
by intelligence services. It is understandable that the same criteria
shall not apply mutatis mutandis to the intelligence sector. Yet today
our societies are nowhere near an equilibrium between the effective and
full reparation of victims and the collection of intelligence material
by services. To strike such balance, legal frameworks should at a
minimum, inter alia, inform populations on remedy avenues in case of
possible violations, notify persons who have been subject to hacking and
provide for the criminal sanction of agents in case of abuse of reckless
recourse to hacking tools or their transfer. Legal frameworks should
ensure flexible standing and evidence standard to possible victims as
well, in conjunction with a guaranteed access to a judicial judge and
strong digital investigation conditions in cases possibly related to
intelligence hacking. Lastly, States must comply and enforce
satisfactory reparations for victims.  
That being said, for the sake of eased spying governments render all
computer users vulnerable. The WannaCrypt episode proved it.
Fortunately, the WannaCrypt incidents did not lead to deadly
consequences. Yet, as Cambridge University professor Anderson puts it,
“it is only a matter of time before CNE causes fatal
accidents”\[115\]. Nowadays computers are embedded in devices that
surround us and our loved ones round the clock. Devices on which our
societies increasingly rely upon, even for the most critical
infrastructure. As this trend shows no signs of slowing down,
intelligence services’ accumulation of computer vulnerabilities seems
questionable for the least, if not completely irresponsible. As malware
expert warned in the wake of the disclosure of NSA’s hacking tools, the
resort to such tools could inadvertently be undermining the security of
the Internet.\[116\] Even if the services assure the public they “never
carry out reckless and irresponsible CNE operations”\[117\], they will
always be a target of choice for malevolent hackers, leading us all in a
dangerous spiral where taxpayers’ money is used to buy tools that
threaten the security of the technologies increasingly pervading every
aspect of their life. Lessons learned by the WannaCrypt incident lead
but to one conclusion. Ideally, intelligence services should not resort
to hacking tools. The prohibition of state hacking should go hand in
hand with national laws imposing clear and precise purposes\[118\]
firmly limiting access requests made by services to the private sector.
To be legitimate, such requests must be subject to judicial approval. 

## Bibliography

## Reference List

### Legal Instruments

#### International

##### General International Law

  - Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and
    Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human
    Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
    (16 December 2005), General Assembly Resolution 60/147
  - International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (adopted 16
    December 1966, entered into force 23 March 1976) 999 UNTS 171
    (ICCPR)
  - Universal Declaration of Human Rights (adopted 10 December 1948)
    UNGA Res 217 A(III) (UDHR)

##### Cybercrime

  - Convention on Cybercrime (adopted 23 November 2001, entered into
    force 1 July 2004), ETS N° 185
  - Explanatory report to the Convention on Cybercrime (Budapest, 23
    November 2001) ETS N° 185

#### Regional

##### EU Hard and Soft Law

  - Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, 2012/C 326/02
    (EU Charter)
  - Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
    Freedoms (European Convention on Human Rights, as amended) (ECHR)
  - Regulation 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
    27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to
    the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such
    data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection
    Regulation)
  - The Article 29 Working Party (WP29) paper, “Rules of Procedure for
    the “Informal Panel of EU DPAs” according to the EU-US Privacy
    Shield" (2017)
  - Study for the LIBE committee of the European Parliament, “National
    Security and Secret Evidence in Legislation and before the Courts:
    Exploring the Challenges” Directorate General for Internal Policies
    of the European Parliament (Brussels, September 2014) PE 509.991

##### African Law

  - African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (adopted 27 June 1981,
    entered into force 21 October 1986) (1982) 21 ILM 58 (African
    Charter, ACHPR)

#### National

  - French Intelligence Act (loi relative au renseignement), law n°
    2015-912, 2015 codified in Book VIII, France’s Interior Security
    Code (Code de la Sécurité Intérieure)
  - French International Intelligence Act (loi relative aux mesures de
    surveillance des communications électroniques internationales), law
    n° 2015-1556, 2015, codified in Book VIII, France’s Interior
    Security Code (Code de la Sécurité Intérieure)
  - French Penal Code
  - French Administrative Justice Code

### Intergovernmental Organisations

  - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
    Rights (UNHCHR) A/HRC/27/37, 30 June 2014

### Books

  - Amalfitano A., *La responsabilité pénale des personnes morales en
    Europe | Une recherche pour la construction d’un modèle commun*
    (L’Harmattan, Condé-sur-Noireau 2015)
  - Delmas Saint-Hilaire J.-P., “Sans nécessité, loi pénale ne vaut” |
    Heurs et malheurs du principe de de légalité des délits et des
    peines (suite)" (2004), Politéia
  - Nuotio K., “European Criminal Law” in Dubber M. D. and Hörnle T.
    (eds), *The Oxford Handbook of Criminal Law* (Oxford University
    Press, Oxford, 2014)
  - Scalia D., *Du principe de légalité des peines en droit
    international pénal* (Bruylant, Brussels, 2011)
  - Van Sliedregt E., “International criminal law” in Dubber M. D. and
    Hörnle T. (eds), *The Oxford Handbook of Criminal Law* (Oxford
    University Press, Oxford, 2014)
  - Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York, New
    York, 2014)

### Legal Briefs, Witness Statements and Opinions

  - La Quadrature du Net, FFDN and FDN v Prime Minister, *Mémoire en
    réplique* on the Decree N° 2015-1185 (*to be published in July
    2017*)
  - Opinion of Advocate General Kokott in Lesoochranárske zoskupenie VLK
    v. Obvodný úrad Trenčín (C243/15) ECJ, ch., 8 November 2016
  - Sophia In ’t Veld’s letter sent to the CNCTR, 2 May 2016
  - Sophia In ’T Veld v. French Prime Minister, *Mémoire en réplique*,
    case No. 404013 (14 March 2017)
  - King E., Witness Statement for Privacy International, cases No. IPT
    14/85/CH and No. IPT 14/120-126/CH (London, 5 Octobre 2015)

### Statements Before Parliament

  - Declaration of Mr. Delon to the French Senate on the 10 February
    2016

### Law Reviews

  - Tracol X., “EU–U.S. Privacy Shield: The saga continues”, Computer
    Law & Security Review, volume 32 (2016)

### Conferences and Lessons

  - Pouillot P., Senior Underwriter, “Les conséquences et la nécessité
    d’être bien assuré : la relation entre le RSSI et les assurances”,
    at the Cybersecurity: How to deal with cyberattacks conference of
    the AFDIT association (Paris, 25 November 2016)
  - Quéméner M., “Cybercriminalité” lessons, *Faculty of Law of the
    Versailles University* (Versailles, February 2017)

### Newspaper articles

  - Ball, J. “Angry Birds and ‘leaky’ phone apps targeted by NSA and
    GCHQ for user data” *the Guardian* (London, 28 January 2014)
  - Bowcott O. “GCHQ accused of ‘persistent’ illegal hacking at security
    tribunal” *the Guardian* (London, 1 December 2015)
  - Campbell D., Siddique H. “Operations cancelled as Hunt accused of
    ignoring cyber-attack warnings” *the Guardian* (London, 15 May 2017)
  - Escarnot J-M “Antiterrorisme : l’espion aux espoirs déçus”
    (Antiterrorism: the spy with dashed hopes) *Libération* (Paris, 16
    February 2017)
  - Follorou J. “Comment le renseignement se prépare à l’éventualité
    d’une victoire de Marine Le Pen”, *Le Monde* (Paris, 10 April
    2017)
  - Gallagher R. “Operation Socialist The Inside Story of How British
    Spies Hacked Belgium’s Largest Telco” *the Intercept* (13 December
    2014)
  - Gayle D., Topping A., Sample I., Marsh S. and Dodd V. “NHS seeks to
    recover from global cyber-attack as security concerns resurface”
    *the Guardian* (London, 13 May 2017)
  - Greenwald, G. and Gallagher, R. “How The NSA Plans To Infect
    ‘Millions’ Of Computers” *the Intercept* (12 March 2014)
  - Investigate Europe “Why Europe’s dependency on Microsoft is a huge
    security risk” (Internet, 13 May 2017)
  - Johnston C., Russell G., Levin S., Wong J. C. and Rawlinson K.,
    “Disruption from cyber-attack to last for days, says NHS Digital –
    as it happened” *the Guardian* (13 May 2017)
  - Rees M. “Loi Renseignement : le cri d’alarme du surveillant des
    surveillants” *NextInpact* (FR) (Paris, 16 February 2016)
  - Sanger D. E., Chan S. and Scott M., “Ransomware’s Aftershocks Feared
    as U.S. Warns of Complexity” *the New York Times* (New York, 14 May
    2017)
  - Sanger D. E. and Perlroth N., “Hackers Hit Dozens of Countries
    Exploiting Stolen N.S.A. Tool” *the New York Times* (New-York, 12
    May 2017)
  - Sanger D. E., “Obama Order Sped Up Wave of Cyberattacks Against
    Iran” *the New York Times* (New York, 1 June 2012)
  - Townsend M. and Doward J., “Cyber-attack sparks bitter political row
    over NHS spending” *the Guardian* (London, 14 May 2017)
  - Untersinger M., “« La Ferme des animaux », concepteur de logiciels
    espions depuis au moins 2009” *Le Monde* (Paris, 6 March 2015)
  - Zetter, K. “Meet ‘Flame,’ The Massive Spy Malware Infiltrating
    Iranian Computers” *Wired* (San Francisco, 28 May 2012)
  - Zetter K. “Inside the Cunning, Unprecedented Hack of Ukraine’s Power
    Grid” *Wired* (3 March 2016)

### Cybersecurity Experts Articles

  - Research team of the Kaspersky Lab “Animals in the APT Farm”
    (Russia, 6 March 2015)
  - Paganini P. “Dino Malware that targeting Iran belong to Animal
    Farm’s arsenal” (Brussels, 1 July 2015)

### Leaks

  - Snowden revelations (2014) (at
    <https://search.edwardsnowden.com/docs/MobileNetworksinMyNOCWorld2014-12-13nsadocs>)
  - Wikileaks, HackingTeam email leaks (at
    <https://wikileaks.org/hackingteam/emails/?q=france&mfrom=&mto=&title=&notitle=&date=&nofrom=&noto=&count=50&sort=0#searchresult>)
  - Wikileaks, “Vault 7: CIA Hacking Tools Revealed” (press release, 7
    March 2017)

### Technical Documentation

  - The GNU/Linux Distribution Timeline 12.10, available at
    <http://futurist.se/gldt/wp-content/uploads/12.10/gldt1210.png>

### Civil Society Documents

  - Unofficial translation made by the volunteers of French organisation
    La Quadrature du Net of the 8th Book of France’s Internal Security
    Code (ISC). Translation is available at
    <https://wiki.laquadrature.net/French_Intelligence_Laws>

### Miscellaneous

  - Article of the Exegetes, “How to Check You Have Not Been Subject to
    Undue Surveillance” (Paris, soon to be published)

### Websites

  - Axa’s : <https://entreprise.axa.fr>

### Case-law

<div id="refs">

<div id="ref-ecjLESVERTS">

*Les Verts c. Parliament* (294/83) CJEC, Apr. 23, 1986

</div>

<div id="ref-ecjJOHNSTON">

*Marguerite Johnston v. Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster
Constabulary* (222/84) CJEC, May 15, 1986

</div>

<div id="ref-ecjDRI">

*Digital Rights Ireland Ltd v. Minister for Communications, Marine and
Natural Resources and others and Kärntner Landesregierung and others*
(C-293/12, C-594/12) ECJ, g. ch., Apr. 8, 2014

</div>

<div id="ref-ecjSCHREMS">

*Maximilian Schrems v Data Protection Commissioner* (C-362/14) ECJ, g.
ch., Oct. 6, 2015

</div>

<div id="ref-ecjAARHUS">

*Lesoochranárske zoskupenie VLK v. Obvodný úrad Trenčín* (C‑243/15) ECJ,
g. ch., Nov. 8, 2016

</div>

<div id="ref-ECJTele2">

*Tele2 Sverige AB v. Postoch telestyrelsen et Secretary of State for the
Home Department* (C-203/15, C-698/15) ECJ, g. ch., Dec. 21, 2016

</div>

<div id="ref-echrKLASS">

*Klass and others v. Germany* (5029/71) ECtHR, Plen., Sep. 6, 1978

</div>

<div id="ref-echrWEBER">

*Weber and Saravia v. Germany* (54934/00) ECtHR, 3<sup>rd</sup> sect.,
Jun. 20, 2006

</div>

<div id="ref-echrLiberty">

*Liberty et autres v. United Kingdom* (58243/00) ECtHR, 4<sup>th</sup>
sect., Jul. 1, 2008

</div>

<div id="ref-echrGillian">

*Gillan and Quinton v. the United Kingdom* (4158/05) ECtHR,
4<sup>th</sup> sect., Jan. 12, 2010

</div>

<div id="ref-echrKENNEDY">

*Kennedy v. the United Kingdom* (26839/05) ECtHR, 4<sup>th</sup> sect.,
May 18, 2010

</div>

<div id="ref-echrSOUZA">

*De Souza Ribeiro v. France* (22689/07) ECtHR, g. ch., Dec. 13, 2012

</div>

<div id="ref-echrPruteanu">

*Pruteanu v. Romania* (30181/05) ECtHR, 3<sup>rd</sup> sect., Feb. 3,
2015

</div>

<div id="ref-echrRE">

*R.E. v. United Kingdom* (62498/11) ECtHR, 4<sup>th</sup> sect., Oct.
25, 2015

</div>

<div id="ref-echrZakharov">

*Roman Zakharov v. Russia* (47143/06) ECtHR, g. ch., Dec. 4, 2015

</div>

<div id="ref-CCInternat">

*Décision relative à la Loi relative aux mesures de surveillance des
communications électroniques internationales* (n° 2015-722) French
Constitutional Council, Nov. 26, 2015

</div>

</div>

## Acronyms

  - ACHPR  
    African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights

  - CFR  
    (EU) Charter of Fundamental Rights

  - CJEC  
    Court of Justice of the European Communities

  - CNA  
    Computer Network Attack

  - CNCTR  
    Commission Nationale de Contrôle des Techniques de 

  - CNE  
    Computer Network Exploitation

  - CoE  
    Council of Europe

  - DGSE  
    Direction Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure

  - DPA  
    Data Protection Authority

  - ECHR  
    European Convention on Human Rights

  - ECtHR  
    European Court of Human Rights

  - ECJ  
    European Court of Justice

  - EU  
    European Union

  - GCHQ  
    UK Government Communications Headquarters

  - GDPR  
    General Data Protection Regulation

  - ICANN  
    Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers

  - ICCPR  
    International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

  - IPT  
    Investigatory Powers Tribunal

  - ISC  
    (French) Internal Security Code

  - LIBE  
    European Parliament Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home
    Affairs

  - NHS  
    National Health Service

  - NSA  
    National Security Agency

  - PLC  
    Programmable Logic Controller

  - UDHR  
    Universal Declaration of Human Rights

  - UN  
    United Nations

  - US  
    United States

  - UK  
    United Kingdom

  - REP  
    Recours pour Excès de Pouvoir

  - SIGINT  
    Signal Intelligence

  - WP29  
    Working Party 29 (gathering the EU Member States DPAs)

<!-- end list -->

1.  Gayle D., Topping A., Sample I., Marsh S. and Dodd V., “NHS seeks to
    recover from global cyber-attack as security concerns resurface”
    *the Guardian* (London, 13 May 2017)
    <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/may/12/hospitals-across-england-hit-by-large-scale-cyber-attack>
    accessed 3 June 2017

2.  Campbell D., Siddique H., “Operations cancelled as Hunt accused of
    ignoring cyber-attack warnings” *the Guardian* (London, 15 May 2017)
    available
    at<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/may/15/warning-of-nhs-cyber-attack-was-not-acted-on-cybersecurity>
    accessed 3 June 2017

3.  See “The cyber-attacks on Friday appeared to be the first time a
    cyberweapon developed by the N.S.A., funded by American taxpayers
    and stolen by an adversary had been unleashed by cybercriminals
    against patients, hospitals, businesses, governments and ordinary
    citizens”, from Sanger D. E. and Perlroth N.’s article, “Hackers Hit
    Dozens of Countries Exploiting Stolen N.S.A. Tool” *the New York
    Times* (New-York, 12 May 2017) available at
    <https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/12/world/europe/uk-national-health-service-cyberattack.html>
    accessed 12 May 2017

4.  Admission made before the British Investigatory Powers Tribunal
    (IPT). Bowcott O., “GCHQ accused of ‘persistent’ illegal hacking at
    security tribunal” *the Guardian* (London, 1 December 2015)
    available at
    <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/01/gchq-accused-of-persistent-illegal-hacking-at-security-tribunal>
    accessed 3 June 2017

5.  Intelligence and Security Committee, Parliament of the United
    Kingdom (12 March 2015) *Privacy and Security: A modern and
    transparent legal framework* at 13 and 14

6.  See the witness statement of Eric King in Privacy International’s
    case against GCHQ’s hacking, cases No. IPT 14/85/CH and No. IPT
    14/120-126/CH (London, 5 Octobre 2015), page 4. Available at
    <https://www.privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/Witness_Statement_Of_Eric_King.pdf>.
    To put it simply, CNE mines data from computers and networks,
    whereas CNA disrupts, damages or destroys data.

7.  Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York, New
    York, 2014) 519

8.  Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York, New
    York, 2014) 456 - 463. Besides, given the strong financial and
    influence ties (with the US giving up £100m to GCHQ between 2010 and
    2013) between the NSA and the GCHQ it seems difficult to imagine the
    GCHQ not rendering favours to the US, as outlined by *the Guardian*
    <https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/aug/01/gchq-spy-agency-nsa-edward-snowden#part-one>
    (accessed 22 May 2017) and
    <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/01/nsa-paid-gchq-spying-edward-snowden>
    (accessed 22 May 2017)

9.  See Sanger D. E., “Obama Order Sped Up Wave of Cyberattacks Against
    Iran” *the New York Times* (New York, 1 June 2012) available at
    <http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/01/world/middleeast/obama-ordered-wave-of-cyberattacks-against-iran.html>
    accessed 2 May 2017

10. In two of the Snowden documents the most important Belgian
    telecommunications operator, Belgacom, is said to have been attacked
    by GCHQ. One QCHQ 2011 presentation states: “Ultimate Goal - enable
    CNE access to BELGACOM Core GRX Routers”
    <https://search.edwardsnowden.com/docs/MobileNetworksinMyNOCWorld2014-12-13nsadocs>.
    Among Belgacom’s customers are the European Commission and the
    European Parliament. For further detail see Gallagher R., “Operation
    Socialist The Inside Story of How British Spies Hacked Belgium’s
    Largest Telco” *the Intercept* (13 December 2014). Available at
    <https://theintercept.com/2014/12/13/belgacom-hack-gchq-inside-story/>
    

11. Nuotio K., ‘European Criminal Law’ in Dubber M. D. and Hörnle T.
    (eds), *The Oxford Handbook of Criminal Law* (Oxford University
    Press, Oxford, 2014) 1115 - 1138

12. These last three years the European Court of Justice has rendered
    bold rulings touching upon EU Member States, such as the *Schrems*
    (C-362/14) ECJ, g. ch., Oct. 6, 2015, the *Digital Rights Ireland*
    (C-293/12, C-594/12) ECJ, g. ch., Apr. 8, 2014 and the *Tele2
    Sverige* (C-203/15, C-698/15) ECJ, g. ch., Dec. 21, 2016 rulings.

13. “\[U\]tiles et nécessaires à la cohésion et à la survie de la
    communauté” (Free translation), J.-P. Delmas Saint-Hilaire, “Sans
    nécessité, loi pénale ne vaut” | Heurs et malheurs du principe de
    de légalité des délits et des peines (suite)" (2004), Politéia
    113-118  

14. Free translation. Original quote in French: “Ce que je ne veux pas
    c’est qu’en France, un jour, en 2017 ou en 2022, un régime
    arbitraire utilise ces outils de surveillance sans aucun contrôle.
    Le pouvoir est toujours associé à un phénomène de cour servile, et
    je douterai toujours de la capacité d’un directeur d’administration
    centrale à résister à la pression d’un chef de l’Etat.” Source:
    Follorou J., “Comment le renseignement se prépare à l’éventualité
    d’une victoire de Marine Le Pen”, *Le Monde* (Paris, 10 April
    2017)
    <http://abonnes.lemonde.fr/societe/article/2017/04/10/comment-le-renseignement-se-prepare-a-l-eventualite-d-une-victoire-de-marine-le-pen_5108826_3224.html?h=12>
    accessed 10 April 2017

15. Article 13 (exerpt):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    “Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in this Convention
    are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national
    authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by
    persons acting in an official capacity.”
    
    </div>

16. Article 8:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the
    competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental
    rights granted him by the constitution or by law.”
    
    </div>

17. Available at
    <http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/RemedyAndReparation.aspx>

18. Article I(2):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>If they have not already done so, States shall, as required
    under international law, ensure that their domestic law is
    consistent with their international legal obligations by:
    <Llapen>(a) Incorporating norms of international human rights law
    and international humanitarian law into their domestic law, or
    otherwise implementing them in their domestic legal system;
    <Llapen>(b) Adopting appropriate and effective legislative and
    administrative procedures and other appropriate measures that
    provide fair, effective and prompt access to justice; <Llapen>(c)
    Making available adequate, effective, prompt and appropriate
    remedies, including reparation, as defined below; <Llapen>(d)
    Ensuring that their domestic law provides at least the same level of
    protection for victims as that required by their international
    obligations.”
    
    </div>

19. Further dealt with at Article 25 of the Guidelines.

20. Article I(2):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>If they have not already done so, States shall, as required
    under international law, ensure that their domestic law is
    consistent with their international legal obligations by:
    <Llapen>(a) Incorporating norms of international human rights law
    and international humanitarian law into their domestic law, or
    otherwise implementing them in their domestic legal system;
    <Llapen>(b) Adopting appropriate and effective legislative and
    administrative procedures and other appropriate measures that
    provide fair, effective and prompt access to justice; <Llapen>(c)
    Making available adequate, effective, prompt and appropriate
    remedies, including reparation, as defined below; <Llapen>(d)
    Ensuring that their domestic law provides at least the same level of
    protection for victims as that required by their international
    obligations.”
    
    </div>

21. \*Article 3 (excerpts):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>The obligation to respect, ensure respect for and implement
    international human rights law and international humanitarian law as
    provided for under the respective bodies of law, includes, inter
    alia, the duty to: <Llapen>(c) Provide those who claim to be victims
    of a human rights or humanitarian law violation with equal and
    effective access to justice, as described below, irrespective of who
    may ultimately be the bearer of responsibility for the
    violation;\[…\]”
    
    </div>
    
    \*Article 11:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>Remedies for gross violations of international human rights
    law and serious violations of international humanitarian law include
    the victim’s right to the following as provided for under
    international law: <Llapen>(a) Equal and effective access to
    justice; <Llapen>(b) Adequate, effective and prompt reparation for
    harm suffered; <Llapen>(c) Access to relevant information concerning
    violations and reparation mechanisms.”
    
    </div>

22. Article 26:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>\[I\]t is understood that the present Basic Principles and
    Guidelines are without prejudice to the right to a remedy and
    reparation for victims of all violations of international human
    rights law and international humanitarian law.”
    
    </div>

23. Available at
    <http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/ProfessionalInterest/ccpr.pdf>

24. Article 3. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>(a) To ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as
    herein recognized are violated shall have an effective remedy,
    notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons
    acting in an official capacity; <Llapen>(b) To ensure that any
    person claiming such a remedy shall have his right thereto
    determined by competent judicial, administrative or legislative
    authorities, or by any other competent authority provided for by the
    legal system of the State, and to develop the possibilities of
    judicial remedy; <Llapen>(c) To ensure that the competent
    authorities shall enforce such remedies when granted.”
    
    </div>

25. Article 3. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>(a) To ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as
    herein recognized are violated shall have an effective remedy,
    notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons
    acting in an official capacity; <Llapen>(b) To ensure that any
    person claiming such a remedy shall have his right thereto
    determined by competent judicial, administrative or legislative
    authorities, or by any other competent authority provided for by the
    legal system of the State, and to develop the possibilities of
    judicial remedy; <Llapen>(c) To ensure that the competent
    authorities shall enforce such remedies when granted.”
    
    </div>

26. Available at <http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_ENG.pdf>

27. Article 13:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in this
    Convention are violated shall have an effective remedy before a
    national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been
    committed by persons acting in an official capacity.”
    
    </div>

28. Available at <http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf>

29. Article 47 (Right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law of
    the Union are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a
    tribunal in compliance with the conditions laid down in this
    Article. <Llapen>Everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing
    within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal
    previously established by law. Everyone shall have the possibility
    of being advised, defended and represented. <Llapen>Legal aid shall
    be made available to those who lack sufficient resources in so far
    as such aid is necessary to ensure effective access to justice.”
    
    </div>

30. Available at
    <http://www.humanrights.se/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/African-Charter-on-Human-and-Peoples-Rights.pdf>

31. Article 50
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>The Commission can only deal with a matter submitted to it
    after making sure that all local remedies, if they exist, have been
    ex- hausted, unless it is obvious to the Commission that the
    procedure of achieving these remedies would be unduly prolonged.”
    
    </div>

32. The ETS No.185 Budapest Convention on Cybercrime has entered into
    force on 2004. The Convention is available at
    <http://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/rms/0900001680081561>

33. See the Budapest Convention’s Explanatory report, page 4. Available
    at <https://rm.coe.int/16800cce5b>

34. Article 32 – Trans-border access to stored computer data with
    consent or where publicly available:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    “A Party may, without the authorisation of another Party:  
    “a. access publicly available (open source) stored computer data,
    regardless of where the data is located geographically; or b. access
    or receive, through a computer system in its territory, stored
    computer data located in another Party, if the Party obtains the
    lawful and voluntary consent of the person who has the lawful
    authority to disclose the data to the Party through that computer
    system.”
    
    </div>

35. Article 6 – Misuse of devices
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    “1. Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as
    may be necessary to establish as criminal offences under its
    domestic law, when committed intentionally and without right: “- a.
    the production, sale, procurement for use, import, distribution or
    otherwise making available of:  
    “i. a device, including a computer program, designed or adapted
    primarily for the purpose of committing any of the offences
    established in accordance with Articles 2 through 5; “ii. a computer
    password, access code, or similar data by which the whole or any
    part of a computer system is capable of being accessed, with intent
    that it be used for the purpose of committing any of the offences
    established in Articles 2 through 5; and  
    “- b. the possession of an item referred to in paragraphs a.i or ii
    above, with intent that it be used for the purpose of committing any
    of the offences established in Articles 2 through 5. A Party may
    require by law that a number of such items be possessed before
    criminal liability attaches.  
    “2. This article shall not be interpreted as imposing criminal
    liability where the production, sale, procurement for use, import,
    distribution or otherwise making available or possession referred to
    in paragraph 1 of this article is not for the purpose of committing
    an offence established in accordance with Articles 2 through 5 of
    this Convention, such as for the authorised testing or protection of
    a computer system. “3. Each Party may reserve the right not to apply
    paragraph 1 of this article, provided that the reservation does not
    concern the sale, distribution or otherwise making available of the
    items referred to in paragraph 1 a.ii of this article.”
    
    </div>

36. Quéméner M., “Cybercriminalité” lessons, Faculty of Law of the
    Versailles University (2017)

37. See the aforementioned Belgacom case. The GCHQ’s attack on the most
    important Belgian telecommunications operator, Belgacom. Among
    Belgacom’s customers are the European Commission and the European
    Parliament. For further detail see Gallagher R., “Operation
    Socialist | The Inside Story of How British Spies Hacked Belgium’s
    Largest Telco” *the Intercept* (13 December 2014). Available at
    <https://theintercept.com/2014/12/13/belgacom-hack-gchq-inside-story/>

38. Advocate General Kokott’s opinion is available here
    <http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=181062&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=30614>
    (ECLI:EU:C:2016:49).

39. Study requested by the LIBE committee of the European Parliament,
    “National Security and Secret Evidence in Legislation and before
    the Courts: Exploring the Challenges” (2014), 67. Available at
    <http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2014/509991/IPOL_STU(2014)509991_EN.pdf>

40. Article L853-2:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>I.- In accordance with Chapter I of Part II of this book,
    when intelligence cannot be collected by any other legally
    authorised mean, usage of technical devices may be authorised as to
    allow: <Llapen>1. To access computer data stored in a computer
    system, to collect, retain and transmit it; <Llapen>2. To access
    computer data, to collect, retain and transmit it, as it is
    displayed onscreen for the user of an automated data processing
    system, as it is entered by keystrokes or as received and
    transmitted by audiovisual peripheral devices. <Llapen>II.- By
    derogation from Article L. 821-4, authorisation to deploy techniques
    mentioned in 1 of I of the present Article is issued for a maximum
    period of thirty days and the one mentioned in paragraph 2 of the
    same I for a maximum period of two months. Authorisation is
    renewable under the same conditions of duration.” \[*Note: The two
    Intelligence Acts of 2015 have not been officially translated. This
    is the unofficial translation made by the volunteers of French
    organisation La Quadrature du Net of the entire 8th Book of France’s
    Internal Security Code (ISC), where most of the Laws’ provisions
    have been codified. This translation is available at
    <https://wiki.laquadrature.net/French_Intelligence_Laws>*\]
    
    </div>

41. Chapter III of the second Title of the Penal Code’s third Book.

42. Official translation:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>Article 323-1 (excerpts): <Llapen>Fraudulently accessing or
    remaining within all or part of an automated data processing system
    is punished by two year’s imprisonment and a fine of €60,000.
    <Llapen>Where this behaviour causes the suppression or modification
    of data contained in that system, or any alteration of the
    functioning of that system, the sentence is three years’
    imprisonment and a fine of €100,000. <Llapen>Article 323-2
    (excerpts): <Llapen>Obstructing or interfering with the functioning
    of an automated data processing system is punished by five years’
    imprisonment and a fine of €150,000. <Llapen>Article 323-3
    (excerpts): <Llapen>The fraudulent introduction of data into an
    automated data processing system, \[extraction, retention,
    reproduction transmission,\] or the fraudulent deletion or
    modification of the data that it contains is punished by five years’
    imprisonment and a fine of €150,000.” <Llapen>*Note of the author:
    The words in bracket in Article 323-3 have been added by the law n°
    2014-1353 of 13 November 2014 and have not yet been officially
    translated*.
    
    </div>

43. The Flame malware takes screenshots of whatever is on the screen
    every 15 seconds when it detects that a communication application is
    in use. If it is not, it will only take screenshots every 60
    seconds. See Zetter, K. “Meet ‘Flame,’ The Massive Spy Malware
    Infiltrating Iranian Computers” *Wired* (San Francisco, 28 May
    2012). Available at <http://www.wired.com/2012/05/flame/> accessed
    13 June 2017

44. See Greenwald, G. and Gallagher, R. “How The NSA Plans To Infect
    ‘Millions’ Of Computers” *the Intercept* (12 March 2014).
    Available at
    \<https://theintercept.com/2014/03/12/nsa-plans-infect-millions-computers-malware/
    accessed 13 June 2017

45. Ibid.

46. See Ball, J. “Angry Birds and ‘leaky’ phone apps targeted by NSA and
    GCHQ for user data” *the Guardian* (London, 28 January 2014).
    Available at:
    http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/27/nsa-gchq-smartphone-app-angry-birds-personal-data
    accessed 13 June 2017. To go further, see the expert report of Eric
    King in Privacy International’s case against GCHQ’s hacking.
    Available at
    <https://www.privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/Witness_Statement_Of_Eric_King.pdf>

47. Article 323-8 (amendment of 2015 - translation by the author as no
    official translation is available):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>This chapter shall not apply to measures implemented by the
    authorized agents of the State services designated by the Prime
    Minister’s Order from among the specialized intelligence services
    mentioned in Article L. 811-2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. To
    ensure the protection of the fundamental interests of the Nation
    mentioned in Article L. 811-3 of the same Code outside the national
    territory.”
    
    </div>

48. Article 323-3-1 (Amendment of 1992):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>A person who, without legitimate motive, imports, possesses,
    offers, transfers or makes available any equipment, instrument,
    computer program or information created or specially adapted to
    commit one or more of the offences prohibited by Articles 323-1 to
    323-3 \[note: articles defining intrusions and other hacking
    methods\], is punished by the penalties prescribed for the offence
    itself, or the one that carries the heaviest penalty.”
    
    </div>

49. Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York, New
    York, 2014) 456 - 463, op. cit.

50. Even though the legality principle is at the very heart of French
    criminal law. See Scalia D., ‘Du principe de légalité des peines en
    droit international pénal’ (Bruylant, Brussels, 2011) 304 - 305

51. Article L. 833-2: To accomplish its mission, the Commission:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>\[…\] <Llapen>4. May request from the Prime Minister any
    elements necessary for the accomplishment of its missions, including
    when the deployed intelligence-gathering technique has neither been
    requested nor authorised or does not meet the traceability
    requirements, except for elements provided by foreign agencies or by
    international bodies or that may give knowledge to the Commission,
    directly or indirectly, of the identity of the sources of the
    specialised intelligence services;” <Llapen>\[*Note: The two
    Intelligence Acts of 2015 have not been officially translated. This
    is the unofficial translation made by the volunteers of French
    organisation La Quadrature du Net of the entire 8th Book of France’s
    Internal Security Code (ISC), where most of the Intelligence Acts’
    provisions have been codified. Translation is available at
    <https://wiki.laquadrature.net/French_Intelligence_Laws>*\]
    
    </div>

52. This acronym could be freely translated as the National commission
    for control of intelligence gathering techniques.

53. Pursuant to Article R773-26 of the ISC.

54. Article L854-9 of the ISC (excerpt):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>On its own initiative or by request of any person wishing to
    verify that no surveillance measure is irregularly being performed
    against them, the Commission shall ensure that the measures
    implemented under this chapter meet the conditions that it specifies
    as well as those defined by the regulations made thereunder and the
    decisions and authorisations of the Prime Minister or his delegates.
    It shall notify the claimant that it has carried out the necessary
    checks, without confirming nor denying the deployment of
    surveillance measures.”
    
    </div>

55. Article L841-1 of the ISC:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>Subject to provisions included in article L. 854-9 of this
    text, the Council of State is competent, under conditions laid down
    in chapter III bis of title VII of book VII of the administrative
    justice code, for requests concerning the deployment of
    intelligence-gathering techniques specified in title V of this book.
    Cases may be brought before the Council of State by: <Llapen>1. Any
    person wishing to ascertain that no intelligence practice is carried
    out improperly against them, after prior recourse to the procedure
    set out in article L. 833-4; <Llapen>2. The National Oversight
    Commission for Intelligence-Gathering Techniques, as established by
    the provisions in article L. 833-8. When a legal proceeding or
    dispute whose resolution depends upon the examination of the
    lawfulness of one or more intelligence gathering practices is
    brought before an administrative court or a judicial authority, it
    can, on its own initiative or upon request of one of the involved
    parties, refer to the Council of State for a preliminary ruling. The
    Council of State shall issue a decision within a month of the
    referral.”
    
    </div>

56. To go further, see the Exegetes’ brief (in French) on the matter,
    available at \<to be published in July 2017\>. If you wish to enter
    with them on the matter, write and email at this address:
    contact@exegetes.eu.org or visit their website \<exegetes.eu.org\>.

57. See the annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
    Human Rights of the 30 June 2014, page 11. Available at
    <http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session27/Documents/A-HRC-27-37_en.doc>

58. A working group of volunteers between three French non-profit
    organizations French Data Network, La Quadrature du Net, and the
    Federation of non-profit Internet access providers.

59. Declaration of Mr. Delon to the French Senate on the 10 February
    2016. Available at
    <http://videos.senat.fr/video.166865_57d282f75660a>. For further
    details, see Rees M. “Loi Renseignement : le cri d’alarme du
    surveillant des surveillants” *NextInpact* (FR) (Paris, 16 February
    2016)
    <https://www.nextinpact.com/news/98556-loi-renseignement-cri-d-alarme-surveillant-surveillants.htm>.
    In his article, Rees observes that “Delon confesses with dignity:
    « We will have to process 40 000 requests yearly, which is
    considerable ». Meaning a total of 109 requests a day (365/365) or
    4,6 requests an hour (24h/24) will have to be checked by the
    CNCTR.”.

60. French foreign intelligence services (acronym for the General
    Directorate for External Security).

61. 1.  Available at the Council of State’s website
        <http://www.conseil-etat.fr/content/download/74775/693991/version/1/file/CE_397623_19102016.anon_compl.pdf>

62. See the Exegetes’ article on their experiences, “How to Check You
    Have Not Been Subject to Undue Surveillance” (Paris, soon to be
    published), available at
    <https://exegetes.eu.org/en/how-to-check-you-have-not-been-subject-to-undue-surveillance/>

63. Which is interesting, since the Council of State has an obligation
    to anonymise its decisions to protect the private life of claimants.
    As it turns out, the decision was published anonymised. Versions of
    it were unilaterally sent to the press before it had been
    anonymised. This is a gross violation of someone’s private life.
    Unfortunately, this lack of due care vis-à-vis the claimant’s
    private life has had a chilling effect on the claimant, who decided
    not to lodge a complaint before the ECtHR.

64. The briefs submitted by MEP in ’t Veld and the Exegetes are
    available at <https://exegetes.eu.org/recours/verifcnctr/>

65. MEP in ’t Veld’s claim can be found on the second page of this
    document
    <https://exegetes.eu.org/recours/verifcnctr/CNCTR/2016-05-02-Lettre%20CNCTR.pdf>

66. See recital 18 of *Décision relative à la Loi relative aux mesures
    de surveillance des communications électroniques internationales*
    (n° 2015-722) French Constitutional Council, Nov. 26, 2015,
    available at
    <http://www.conseil-constitutionnel.fr/conseil-constitutionnel/francais/les-decisions/acces-par-date/decisions-depuis-1959/2015/2015-722-dc/decision-n-2015-722-dc-du-26-novembre-2015.146546.html>

67. Due to the monopoly on speaking held by Council Attorneys before the
    Council of State and because the cases, dealt with by Council’s
    specialised Chamber oversighting national security questions, can be
    deemed to require that persons with no defence or national security
    clearance must leave the room.

68. See Article 6 of the 2013 Justice and Security Act.

69. In ’T Veld v. French Prime Minister, *Mémoire en réplique*, case
    No. 404013 (14 March 2017) pts 29 et seq. available at
    <https://exegetes.eu.org/recours/verifcnctr/CEtat/2017-03-14-Replique-CSI-PremierMinistre.pdf>
    accessed 20 May 2017

70. Study requested by the LIBE committee of the European Parliament,
    “National Security and Secret Evidence in Legislation and before
    the Courts: Exploring the Challenges” (2014) 66 - 67. Available at
    <http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2014/509991/IPOL_STU(2014)509991_EN.pdf>

71. See Escarnot J-M, ‘Antiterrorisme : l’espion aux espoirs déçus’
    (Antiterrorism: the spy with dashed hopes) (2017), Libération
    <http://www.liberation.fr/france/2017/02/16/antiterrorisme-l-espion-aux-espoirs-decus_1549029>
    accessed 17 February 2017

72. Commission implementing decision no. 2016/1250 of 12 July 2016
    pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the
    Council on the adequacy of the protection provided by the EU-U.S.
    Privacy Shield, available at
    http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/files/privacy-shield-adequacy-decision\_en.pdf

73. For further details see the Article 29 Working Party (WP29) “Rules
    of Procedure for the “Informal Panel of EU DPAs” according to the
    EU-US Privacy Shield" (2017) available at
    <http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3472691-Article-29-WP-Privacy-Shield-Rules-of-Procedure.html>

74. See Tracol X., “EU–U.S. Privacy Shield: The saga continues”,
    Computer Law & Security Review, volume 32 (2016) 775–777

75. Please note that the GDPR will only enter into force 25 May 2018.

76. Article 82(1):
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>1. Any person who has suffered material or non-material
    damage as a result of an infringement of this Regulation shall have
    the right to receive compensation from the controller or processor
    for the damage suffered.”
    
    </div>

77. See Medium user Paraig O’Mara’s analysis (at
    <https://medium.com/@beyourownreason/revealed-the-true-extent-of-hacking-team-contacts-across-europe-dc04e5bdde2>)
    of the HackingTeam email leaks of Wikileaks (at
    <https://wikileaks.org/hackingteam/emails/?q=france&mfrom=&mto=&title=&notitle=&date=&nofrom=&noto=&count=50&sort=0#searchresult>.

78. See their offers online (FR) at
    <https://entreprise.axa.fr/assurance-biens-entreprise/cyber-risques.html#panel2>
    (accessed 19 June 2017)

79. Pouillot P., Senior Underwriter, “Les conséquences et la nécessité
    d’être bien assuré : la relation entre le RSSI et les assurances”,
    at the Cybersecurity: How to deal with cyberattacks conference of
    the AFDIT association (Paris, 25 November 2016)

80. Book in which he reflects on his PhD thesis on legal person’s
    liability.

81. See Townsend M. and Doward J., “Cyber-attack sparks bitter political
    row over NHS spending” *the Guardian* (London, 14 May 2017)
    available at
    https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/may/13/cyber-attack-on-nhs-sparks-bitter-election-battle
    accessed 19 June 2017 <clearpage>

82. Pursuant to article 9 of the GDPR, “data concerning health” relates
    to not mere personal data, but a “special categor\[y\] \[…\] of
    personal data” deserving scrupulous caution.

83. Amalfitano A., La responsabilité pénale des personnes morales en
    Europe | Une recherche pour la construction d’un modèle commun
    (L’Harmattan, Condé-sur-Noireau 2015) 148 

84. See Investigate Europe’s article, “Why Europe’s dependency on
    Microsoft is a huge security risk” (Internet, 13 May 2017) available
    at
    <http://www.investigate-europe.eu/en/why-europes-dependency-on-microsoft-is-a-huge-security-risk/>

85. See the GNU/Linux Distribution Timeline 12.10, available at
    <http://futurist.se/gldt/wp-content/uploads/12.10/gldt1210.png>

86. Amalfitano, op. cit.

87. As they are often targeted and used by the services to carry out
    attacks.

88. Van Sliedregt E., “International criminal law” in Dubber M. D. and
    Hörnle T. (eds), *The Oxford Handbook of Criminal Law* (Oxford
    University Press, Oxford, 2014) 1139 - 1163

89. Articles 8 and 9:
    
    <div class="loi">
    
    <Llapen>8. For purposes of the present document, victims are persons
    who individually or collectively suffered harm, including physical
    or mental injury, emotional suffering, economic loss or substantial
    impairment of their fundamental rights, through acts or omissions
    that constitute gross violations of international human rights law,
    or serious violations of international humanitarian law. Where
    appropriate, and in accordance with domestic law, the term “victim”
    also includes the immediate family or dependants of the direct
    victim and persons who have suffered harm in intervening to assist
    victims in distress or to prevent victimization. <Llapen>9. A person
    shall be considered a victim regardless of whether the perpetrator
    of the violation is identified, apprehended, prosecuted, or
    convicted and regardless of the familial relationship between the
    perpetrator and the victim.”
    
    </div>

90. Whole purpose (of a given malware).

91. Zetter K., “Inside the Cunning, Unprecedented Hack of Ukraine’s
    Power Grid” *Wired* (3 March 2016), available at:
    <https://www.wired.com/2016/03/inside-cunning-unprecedented-hack-ukraines-power-grid/>
    acessed 7 April 2017

92. See Untersinger M., “« La Ferme des animaux », concepteur de
    logiciels espions depuis au moins 2009” *Le Monde* (Paris, 6 March
    2015), available at
    <http://www.lemonde.fr/pixels/article/2015/03/06/la-ferme-des-animaux-concepteurs-de-logiciels-espions-depuis-au-moins-2009_4588510_4408996.html>

93. Among other targets, such as journalists, corporations and
    activists.

94. The Kaspersky lab is one of the world’s most respected IT security
    company. It is equally famous for the precision of its malware
    analysis.

95. Article by the research team of the Kaspersky Lab, “Animals in the
    APT Farm” (Russia, 6 March 2015), available at:
    <https://securelist.com/animals-in-the-apt-farm/69114/>. For further
    information see the European Union Agency for Network and
    Information Security (ENISA) member Paganini P.’s article “Dino
    Malware that targeting Iran belong to Animal Farm’s arsenal”
    (Brussels, 1 July 2015), available at
    <http://securityaffairs.co/wordpress/38204/cyber-crime/dino-malware-animal-farm.html>

96. Piece of hardware controlling the industrial mechanism it is
    associated to. It can for instance turn a program on/off or change
    the speed. Siemens PLCs, as the ones used at Natanz, have a making
    number. Natanz’s PLCs were directly aimed at by the (original) code
    of Stuxnet as their making numbers were integrated amid the code.

97. See Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York,
    New York, 2014) 222 - 226

98. As it was the case when Wikileaks started publishing the CIA’s
    hacking tools it had developed in secret leaks. Wikileaks, press
    release (7 March 2017) \< https://wikileaks.org/ciav7p1/\>

99. Johnston C., Russell G., Levin S., Wong J. C. and Rawlinson K.,
    “Disruption from cyber-attack to last for days, says NHS Digital –
    as it happened” *the Guardian* (London, 13 May 2017) available at
    <https://www.theguardian.com/society/live/2017/may/12/england-hospitals-cyber-attack-nhs-live-updates>
    accessed 15 May 2017

100. See Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York,
     New York, 2014) 593 and blog article “Dead nuclear scientist headed
     Iran’s response team to Stuxnet” available at
     <https://israelmatzav.blogspot.com/2010/12/dead-nuclear-scientist-headed-irans.html>

101. See Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York,
     New York, 2014) 594

102. See Zetter K., *Countdown to zero-day* (Crown Publishers New York,
     New York, 2014) 596 - 617

103. See Sanger D. E., Chan S. and Scott M., “Ransomware’s Aftershocks
     Feared as U.S. Warns of Complexity” *the New York Times* (New York,
     14 May 2017) available at
     <https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/14/world/europe/cyberattacks-hack-computers-monday.html>
     accessed 16 May 2017

104. See articles 15 to 23 of the UN Guidelines.

105. Grotuis H., *De Jure Belli Ac Pacis* (51615), Book II, ch. XXI,
     para. II (transl. F. W. Kelsey c.s., 1964), 523

106. As an instance, this criminal law principle was deemed
     constitutionnal by Constitutionnal council decisions. See Cons.
     const., 13 March 2003, dec. n° 2003-467 DC, Rec, 211 and Cons.
     const., 25 Feb. 2010, dec. n° 2010-604 DC, Rec, para 70 

107. Study requested by the LIBE committee of the European Parliament,
     “National Security and Secret Evidence in Legislation and before
     the Courts: Exploring the Challenges” (2014), 67. Available at
     <http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2014/509991/IPOL_STU(2014)509991_EN.pdf>

108. As the tool Paranoid Smurf developped by GCHQ and revealed by
     Snowden in 2013. Paranoid Smurf is a piece of code ensuring that
     all malware remain hidden. Source: Bowcott O., “GCHQ accused of
     ‘persistent’ illegal hacking at security tribunal” (2015)
     available at
     <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/01/gchq-accused-of-persistent-illegal-hacking-at-security-tribunal>

109. Quote of Jaffey B. of PI, Bowcott O., “GCHQ accused of ‘persistent’
     illegal hacking at security tribunal” (2015) available at
     <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/01/gchq-accused-of-persistent-illegal-hacking-at-security-tribunal>

110. 
     
     <div class="loi">
     
     <Llapen>Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures
     as may be necessary to establish the powers and procedures provided
     for in this section for the purpose of specific criminal
     investigations or proceedings.”
     
     </div>

111. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of
     the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression, U.N. Doc.
     A/HRC/23/40 (2013) pt 62

112. Quéméner M., “Cybercriminalité” lessons, Faculty of Law of the
     Versailles University (2017)

113. *Klass and others v. Germany* (5029/71) ECtHR, Plen., Sep. 6, 1978,
     para. 36

114. *Zakharov v. Russia* (47143/06) ECtHR, g. ch., Dec. 4, 2015, para.
     298 and 234

115. Bowcott O., “GCHQ accused of ‘persistent’ illegal hacking at
     security tribunal” (2015) available at
     <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/01/gchq-accused-of-persistent-illegal-hacking-at-security-tribunal>

116. Hypponen M. is an expert in malware who serves as chief research
     officer at the Finnish security firm F-Secure. See See Gallagher,
     R. and Greenwald, G. (12 March 2014) "How The NSA Plans To Infect
     ‘Millions’ Of Computers, The Intercept. Available at
     \<https://theintercept.com/2014/03/12/nsa-plans-infect-millions-computers-malware/
     accessed 13 June 2017

117. Ciaran Martin, director of cyber security at GCHQ. Bowcott O.,
     “GCHQ accused of ‘persistent’ illegal hacking at security
     tribunal” (2015) available at
     <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/01/gchq-accused-of-persistent-illegal-hacking-at-security-tribunal>

118. Point 93 of the Schrems ECJ ruling already mentioned above. The ECJ
     goes in-depth on purpose lilitation requirements, that must be
     “specific, strictly restricted and capable of justifying the
     interference”.

---
license: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ 
source: https://lori.is
...
